When Dr. Svante Arrhenius in the year 1903 received the Nobel Prize in Chemistry it came as a fitting reward of his achievements principally
 in the electro-chemical field. It was natural, however, that a genius of his calibre would not limit his interest to the ¡°infinitely small¡± but would gradually 
broaden it to encompass the ¡°infinitely large.¡± And ¡°to take an interest¡± means with Dr. Arrhenius to push the boundaries of the unknown and of the 
unexplored a little farther away from man. His evolution in this respect runs parallel with that of all the great men who stand out as leaders in the history of
 science. Wrapt up in the solution of a particular problem and fired with the divine yearning to reach ultimate causes they are inevitably driven to ever widening circles of research
Textbook in Theoretical Electro-Chemistry; Textbook in Cosmological Physics; Worlds in the Making; Infinity of the Universe; Life of the Universe as Conceived by Man 
from Earliest Ages to the Present Time;¡ªthus run the titles of a few of the works we already have by Dr. Arrhenius¡¯ hand. How were it possible for him NOT to write The 
Destinies of the Stars? The volume came as inevitably as fruition follows flowering. What remains to be seen is if Dr. Arrhenius can withstand the tremendous temptation
 that must be at work in his soul to lift, be it ever so little, the curtain that separates natural science and philosophy; we hope he will give in; we admire in this book how 
he reads ¡°The Riddle of the Milky Way¡±; we certainly wish to know how he reads¡ªthe riddle of the universe.
The Destinies of the Stars met with unexampled success in Sweden. Three editions appeared within two months when 
the book was published in November, 1915. The American version has been somewhat delayed principally due to war conditions. 
This, however, has not been wholly a loss to the English-speaking world as Dr. Arrhenius by no means has been idle in the meantime. 
Considerable additional subject matter, including three new pictures, has been added, chiefly based on the most recent astronomical discoveries some of which 
have been recorded as late as 1917.
For valuable suggestions and for all the American
 equivalents of the metric measures in the original, the reader as well as the translator, is indebted to a member of the Publishing 
House that presents this volume in such an attractive way, Mr. E. W. Putnam, himself an ardent lover of astronomy and a writer on the subject.
Dr. Arrhenius is justly renowned for his lucid style and polished form. All that is lacking in these qualities within the 
covers of this volume is wholly due to the deficiencies of the translator, who however could not resist the temptation of transferring to Anglo-Saxon
 soil this monument to the genius of his former teacher, Dr. Svante Arrhenius.
Since I presented Worlds in the Making and Life of the Universe as Conceived by Man from Earliest Ages to the Present Time to the public¡ªwhich received them with far greater
 interest and appreciation than I could foresee¡ªI have had repeated occasions to treat new questions of a cosmological nature, questions largely arisen from new discoveries and
 observations within the scope of astronomy. Vast new vistas have been opened through the study of the relation of the stars to the ¡°Milky Way¡± and through observations of our 
neighbour planets. The last mentioned
Since I presented Worlds in the Making and Life of the Universe as Conceived by Man from Earliest Ages to the Present Time to the public¡ª
which received them with far greater interest and appreciation than I could foresee¡ªI have had repeated occasions to treat new questions of a cosmological nature, 
questions largely arisen from new discoveries and observations within the scope of astronomy. Vast new vistas have been opened through the study of the relation of the
 stars to the ¡°Milky Way¡± and through observations of our neighbour planets. The last mentioned
stars. Chronology. The Australian negro¡¯s conception of the stars. Day and night, summer and winter. Solar year. Sun-worship. Changing phases of the moon in chronology. 
The Mexican ¡°Tonalamatl.¡± Moon-worship in Mesopotamia. Significance of the moon in astrology. The sun and the heat. Agriculture¡¯s demand on chronology. Worship of the 
planet Venus by the Mexicans and the Babylonians. The Church Calendar. The Zodiac. The seven planets. The week. Correspondence and sympathetic magic. The Platonic-
Primitive conceptions of the Milky Way. Anaxagoras and Demokritos. Ptolemaios. Galilei. Cosmogenic speculations. Wm. Herschel¡¯s statistical researches regarding the distribution of the stars. The Milky Way as the foundation of the stellar system. The Milky Way as a nebula. Classification according to age of the stars, their distribution and velocity. Motion in the Orion nebula. The planetary nebul?. Kapteyn¡¯s ¡°star-drifts.¡± The origin of the Milky Way. Comparison 
Primitive conceptions of the Milky Way. Anaxagoras and Demokritos. Ptolemaios. Galilei. Cosmogenic speculations. Wm. Herschel¡¯s statistical researches regarding the distribution of the stars. The Milky Way as the foundation of the stellar system. The Milky Way as a nebula. Classification according to age of the stars, their distribution and velocity. Motion in the Orion nebula. The planetary nebul?. Kapteyn¡¯s ¡°star-drifts.¡± The origin of the Milky Way. Comparison 
The four elements of Aristotle. Humid-warm climates. The Congo and Amazon basins. The carboniferous age. The effect of cloudiness. Desert climate. Steppes. ¡°Kevirs¡± and ¡°Bayirs.¡± Sand dunes. The great Kevir. Climatic changes. Khanikoff¡¯s description. Salt lakes. Deposits of salt through evaporation. Huntington 
Outer envelope of the stars. The large planets. Spectra. Mars, Earth, Venus, Mercury. Atmosphere impossible on the moon. The light from the Earth. The atmosphere of Mercury. The atmosphere of Venus and its Clouds. Composition of air and its change with height. Forced circulation. Troposphere and 
Inhabited Worlds. Kinship of the stellar bodies. Presence of life. Importance of water and carbon. Importance of temperature. All life evolved from existence in water. Necessity of oxygen. Bacteria. Reducing substances preponderable in the World-matter. Volcanic gases and gases in solidified lava. Water, vapour, carbon dioxide, nitrogen gas, and sulphurous acid. Permanent 
gases and hydrogen. The poisonous character of the original air. Its purification. The importance of plant life and necessity of a solid crust in this process. Supply of carbonic dioxide and production of oxygen. The work of Koene. Silica. Cooling of the Earth and changing surface temperature. The ice-periods. Centres of collapse and lines of fissure in the crust. General survey of the gradual change of the air.
Measurements by Slipher. Calculations by Very. The temperature on Mars according to these sources. Campbell¡¯s expedition to Mount Whitney in California. Oxygen on Mars. The cold on Mars detrimental to anything but the lowest forms of life. Cause of different results by Slipher and Campbell. Very¡¯s answer to Campbell¡¯s criticism. New measurements by Slipher. Campbell¡¯s new method of measurement of 1910. Christiansen calculates the temperature on Mars from intensity of the Sun¡¯s radiation. The sun-constant. Average temperature of Mars about forty degrees Centigrade. Possibly low plant life around the poles during summer. The canals on Mars are probably fissures in the crust. The length of the canals compared with that of the fissures in Earth¡¯s crust. The double canals on Mars compared 
with the parallel fissures in Calabria. Emanations along the fissures. The canals as affected by increasing cold or heat. The polar snow. Thawing of the canals. Travel of the water vapour independent of the topography. The desert sand on Mars. Clouds and mists. Highlands and mountains on Mars. Sand filling of the canals. The seas on Mars. The straightness and uniform breadth of the canals an illusion. Light and dark spots. ¡°New¡± canals. The fancies of Lowell.
Moon. The mountains on the Moon. Volcanoes. Circular elevated rings. ¡°Seas¡± on the Moon. The Crater ¡°Linn¨¦.¡± ¡°Sinuses¡± and ¡°Streaks¡± on the Moon. The light matter of the streaks probably lava-scum. The colour of the Moon and of the Earth. Comparison between the Moon and Mars. Changes on the Moon. ¡°Snow¡± and ¡°Vegetation¡± on the Moon according to W. Pickering. The fate of Mars and of the Earth. Falling meteoric dust. The climate on Venus. Swamps like those of the carboniferous age. Abundant vegetation. Low organisms. ¡°Culture¡± on Venus will proceed from the poles. The future of Venus. The claims of astrology in modern light. Tycho Brahe. The dreams of Giordano Bruno probably true.
most people, is of little practical value. What benefit could we derive from knowing whether a star lies a hundred or a thousand billion miles from the Sun, or from understanding how the stellar bodies have evolved in the course of billions of years? And yet astronomy has not been as futile as is commonly imagined, neither is it useless at the present time. This science is still of the greatest importance to common life by fixing our standards of time and, before the introduction of the compass, was invaluable also to navigation, which art, moreover, depends now upon astronomy for determination of geographical position on the open sea. Observations for these purposes, however, are of such a simple nature, that they hardly fall under the astronomical science proper, but rather under the applied sciences. They have entered into daily life much as, in commerce, the determination of the weight of a body is not considered as belonging to the science of physics, although it depends on the use of a physical instrument, the scale.
But we must not forget that what we now consider so commonplace that it entirely has lost the grand aspect of science, once was the goal of groping scientific endeavour. All natural science has grown out of the needs of practical life.
Geometry is probably even older than astronomy. The name means: to measure land, and the oldest geometry was, accordingly, devoted to the measurement of distances on the Earth and later to the determination of the area of land-holdings. This extremely important practical application of geometry is of such a simple nature that it is not mentioned in modern mathematical science, to which geometry belongs. In this manner, the original theses of all our natural sciences have become the possession of the public to such a degree 
hat they are looked upon as self-evident. This is the case also with those parts of astronomy which, because of their practical importance at the outset, gave rise to the science itself.
The growing knowledge about the stars, like all higher insight, became among primitive peoples the private possession of their leaders, was by these kept a secret and made a part of the venerable realm of religion. We find that a majority of these old peoples rendered worship to the stars, believing them to govern the fates of human beings. This may indeed seem highly remarkable, as our everyday experience is that the stellar bodies, with the exception of the Sun, exert no perceptible influence on organic nature, and such conclusion is emphatically confirmed by the systematic collection of all our experiences which we call modern science. The Sun, as stated, is the exception as it reigns over the entire nature, the living as well as the lifeless, by virtue of the heat and light which abundantly flow from this autocrat of our planetary system. Perhaps the Moon also plays some small active part as it seems somewhat to affect the barometric pressure, the magnetic and particularly the electric conditions of the atmosphere, which, in turn, appear to influence several life processes. On the other hand we cannot point to any influence upon nature traceable to the other stellar bodies.
Obvio
spirits dwelt in beasts of prey and in other noxious animals, such as poisonous snakes; others caused earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, snowstorms, lightning ravages, fires, floods, heat, drought, etc. Against these calamities religious exercises formed a protection. Religion sprang mainly from fear of spirits. Later on thank offerings and hymns were bestowed upon benevolent objects and phenomena in nature.
It is evident that this primitive, simple religion is of far greater age than star-worship. The latter presupposes a comparatively high degree of culture. The stars were of no benefit to man until it became necessary to measure time intervals comprising a greater number of days than might be counted on one¡¯s fingers. How this growth in all probability took place we shall endeavour to explain in the following. Fairly certain it is that star-worship did not grow out of man¡¯s admiration for the sublime drama which at dawn of morning commences at the eastern horizon, and proceeds in the course of a day over the firmament in order to close before night just beyond the western expanses, neither was it founded on man¡¯s gratitude toward the torch-bearers of night for their incessant battle against gloomy clouds and all the other spirits of darkness.
Even tribes on a rather low stage have no doubt noticed the most conspicuous among the stellar bodies. The attitude of the Australian aborigines is significant in this connection. According to Spencer and Gillen they possess legends about the Moon, which is male, about the Sun and Venus, about the pernicious Magellanic clouds, and about the Pleiades, who, like the Sun and Venus, are considered female. Eclipses have, as is natural, attracted the greatest attention. While these primitive men indulge in an incredible number of religious ceremonies pertaining to conditions of their daily 
life, none of these exercises are devoted to the stars, if we except stone throwing against the Sun during eclipses. Even this treatment is left with considerable serenity of mind for the medicine-men to perform. It is very significant that all stellar bodies are of earthly origin, that the Moon is of male gender while the Sun, Venus, and the Pleiades are female, which indicates that the Moon is considered of greatest distinction. They count time according to ¡°sleeps,¡± i. e. the number of times they have slept, or according to moons; longer periods according to seasons; they have names for summer and winter. They can count to five, or perhaps rather to four, as the term five also means ¡°many.¡± Ideas of power centred in the stellar bodies are evidently absent and therefore also religious ceremonies pertaining thereto. A few tales exist relating to the stars as to other objects within their observation. Thus conditions would undoubtedly have remained but for the high value which the want of a chronometry gave to the regularly changing light of the stellar bodies.
The difference between day and night is of such a deeply fundamental importance that it has left its stamp on the whole organic nature on the surface of the Earth. Plants entirely change their life processes in the course of twenty-four hours; during the day they add to their growth under the stimulus of light; during the night they partly expend the strength gathered in daytime. This cycle is so regular that it functions automatically. The prominent botanist, Pfeffer, has experimented with a Mimosa, which, as is well known, unfolds its leaves during the day but curls them during the night. If left in a dark room any arbitrary day, it nevertheless uncurls its leaves. By means of electric light Pfeffer changed night into day for the plant kept in the dark room. It took considerable time before the plant adjusted itself to the new conditions so that it unfolded its leaves to the influence of the electric light. Animals behave similarly. The night and day period is instilled in their blood. In a certain sense they possess an instinctive chronometry.
It is often stated that the assurance of the return of sunlight after the darkness of night enabled humanity with greater equanimity to acquiesce in the loss of light during one half of its existence and that worship was rendered to the Sun in gratitude therefor. ¡°A new outlook upon life,¡± says Troels Lund, ¡°awakens the moment the great discovery is made that the night of sleep and the night of fear are equally long and always followed by morning and subsequent day.¡± This discovery, however, our predecessors made long before 
life, none of these exercises are devoted to the stars, if we except stone throwing against the Sun during eclipses. Even this treatment is left with considerable serenity of mind for the medicine-men to perform. It is very significant that all stellar bodies are of earthly origin, that the Moon is of male gender while the Sun, Venus, and the Pleiades are female, which indicates that the Moon is considered of greatest distinction. They count time according to ¡°sleeps,¡± i. e. the number of times they have slept, or according to moons; longer periods according to seasons; they have names for summer and winter. They can count to five, or perhaps rather to four, as the term five also means ¡°many.¡± Ideas of power centred in the stellar bodies are evidently absent and therefore also religious ceremonies pertaining thereto. A few tales exist relating to the stars as to other objects within their observation. Thus conditions would undoubtedly have remained but for the high value which the want of a chronometry gave to the regularly changing light of the stellar bodies.
The difference between day and night is of such a deeply fundamental importance that it has left its stamp on the whole organic nature on the surface of the Earth. Plants entirely change their life processes in the course of twenty-four hours; during the day they add to their growth under the stimulus of light; during the night they partly expend the strength gathered in daytime. This cycle is so regular that it functions automatically. The prominent botanist, Pfeffer, has experimented with a Mimosa, which, as is well known, unfolds its leaves during the day but curls them during the night. If left in a dark room any arbitrary day, it nevertheless uncurls its leaves. By means of electric light Pfeffer changed night into day for the plant kept in the dark room. It took considerable time before the plant adjusted itself to the new conditions so that it unfolded its leaves to the influence of the electric light. Animals behave similarly. The night and day period is instilled in their blood. In a certain sense they possess an instinctive chronometry.
It is often stated that the assurance of the return of sunlight after the darkness of night enabled humanity with greater equanimity to acquiesce in the loss of light during one half of its existence and that worship was rendered to the Sun in gratitude therefor. ¡°A new outlook upon life,¡± says Troels Lund, ¡°awakens the moment the great discovery is made that the night of sleep and the night of fear are equally long and always followed by morning and subsequent day.¡± This discovery, however, our predecessors made long before 
life, none of these exercises are devoted to the stars, if we except stone throwing against the Sun during eclipses. Even this treatment is left with considerable serenity of mind for the medicine-men to perform. It is very significant that all stellar bodies are of earthly origin, that the Moon is of male gender while the Sun, Venus, and the Pleiades are female, which indicates that the Moon is considered of greatest distinction. They count time according to ¡°sleeps,¡± i. e. the number of times they have slept, or according to moons; longer periods according to seasons; they have names for summer and winter. They can count to five, or perhaps rather to four, as the term five also means ¡°many.¡± Ideas of power centred in the stellar bodies are evidently absent and therefore also religious ceremonies pertaining thereto. A few tales exist relating to the stars as to other objects within their observation. Thus conditions would undoubtedly have remained but for the high value which the want of a chronometry gave to the regularly changing light of the stellar bodies.
The difference between day and night is of such a deeply fundamental importance that it has left its stamp on the whole organic nature on the surface of the Earth. Plants entirely change their life processes in the course of twenty-four hours; during the day they add to their growth under the stimulus of light; during the night they partly expend the strength gathered in daytime. This cycle is so regular that it functions automatically. The prominent botanist, Pfeffer, has experimented with a Mimosa, which, as is well known, unfolds its leaves during the day but curls them during the night. If left in a dark room any arbitrary day, it nevertheless uncurls its leaves. By means of electric light Pfeffer changed night into day for the plant kept in the dark room. It took considerable time before the plant adjusted itself to the new conditions so that it unfolded its leaves to the influence of the electric light. Animals behave similarly. The night and day period is instilled in their blood. In a certain sense they possess an instinctive chronometry.
It is often stated that the assurance of the return of sunlight after the darkness of night enabled humanity with greater equanimity to acquiesce in the loss of light during one half of its existence and that worship was rendered to the Sun in gratitude therefor. ¡°A new outlook upon life,¡± says Troels Lund, ¡°awakens the moment the great discovery is made that the night of sleep and the night of fear are equally long and always followed by morning and subsequent day.¡± This discovery, however, our predecessors made long before 
The people of the bronze age here in the North were zealous Sun-worshippers thousands of years ago, as the many relics from this period, and particularly the rock-carvings, bear witness. The Celts of Western Europe have frequently symbolized the Sun as a cross, while the worship of Moon and stars seems to have been foreign to them as well as to the bronze-age people of the North. The Jewish Samson (Simson) was a Sun-hero, the name being related to the Babylonian Shamash, the Sun-god. In Hesiodos¡¯ cosmogony the Sun (Helios) is mentioned before the Moon (Selene). The old Germans worshipped both Sun and Moon, particularly the former. The Slavs possessed a Sun-god Dazbogu, but no deity identified with the Moon. Similar conditions obtained among the Finnish forefathers. The Chinese Tao-priests light fires during the vernal equinox as we do at Walpurgis and midsummer, and they sacrifice rice and salt to the flames. ¡°This is a remnant of the Sun-cult,¡± says Solomon Reinach, from whom these data in regard to Sun-worship principally are taken. In Japan, the Moon is of male sex, the Sun of female sex, which indicates that there, as with the Australian negroes, the Moon was originally considered more important than the Sun. Nevertheless the Japanese are now Sun-worshippers; the Sun is placed as emblem of the most high in their flag and the Mikado is known to trace his lineage from the Sun. They have, therefore, long ago passed from Moon-cult to Sun-cult. It is probable that this step was taken even earlier in China, where the Sun furthermore is of male sex. With growing civilization all people learn to understand, as have the Japanese, the superior importance of the Sun. The Incas of Peru, who reached a very high grade of culture, were sun-worshippers and called themselves children of the Sun, 
although they lived near the equator where the Moon-cult, as we presently shall see, owns its most faithful adherents.
In the neighbourhood of the equator, winter and summer differ very slightly with respect to temperature and altitude of the Sun. Rather, it is the alternation of humid and dry seasons that is of deciding importance. No sheet of snow covers the ground in winter-time, kills the vegetation, or decimates the supply of nourishment for animals and men. Indeed, contrary to our experience, a suppression of growth often accompanies a high altitude of the Sun due to the drought which simultaneously occurs. The altitude and luminosity of the Sun change altogether too slightly in the course of the year to attract the attention of primitive man. The light of the Moon, on the other hand, varies from full intensity to nothing and this takes place in periods so short that memory has no time to forget the cycle. Even the low-standing Australian negroes utilize the phases of the Moon to denote remote times. Chronometry in any true sense they do not possess, unable as they are to state the number of days in a month. How much more fortunate the peoples who could count to ten or better yet to twenty and thus were able to use the single or the double decade as a measure of time. For them it was easy to determine the time between two successive phases of the Moon, seven and a half days apart.
The truth once grasped that four phases separate two new Moons the important bridge could be established between the short measure, a day, and the longer measure, a month. The latter was then found to be nearly thirty times longer than the former. On a higher stage of culture, it was discovered that this ratio was not exact and the discrepancy must greatly have puzzled the people. The correct ratio is 29.53. At all events the periodic return of full Moon and new 
although they lived near the equator where the Moon-cult, as we presently shall see, owns its most faithful adherents.
In the neighbourhood of the equator, winter and summer differ very slightly with respect to temperature and altitude of the Sun. Rather, it is the alternation of humid and dry seasons that is of deciding importance. No sheet of snow covers the ground in winter-time, kills the vegetation, or decimates the supply of nourishment for animals and men. Indeed, contrary to our experience, a suppression of growth often accompanies a high altitude of the Sun due to the drought which simultaneously occurs. The altitude and luminosity of the Sun change altogether too slightly in the course of the year to attract the attention of primitive man. The light of the Moon, on the other hand, varies from full intensity to nothing and this takes place in periods so short that memory has no time to forget the cycle. Even the low-standing Australian negroes utilize the phases of the Moon to denote remote times. Chronometry in any true sense they do not possess, unable as they are to state the number of days in a month. How much more fortunate the peoples who could count to ten or better yet to twenty and thus were able to use the single or the double decade as a measure of time. For them it was easy to determine the time between two successive phases of the Moon, seven and a half days apart.
The truth once grasped that four phases separate two new Moons the important bridge could be established between the short measure, a day, and the longer measure, a month. The latter was then found to be nearly thirty times longer than the former. On a higher stage of culture, it was discovered that this ratio was not exact and the discrepancy must greatly have puzzled the people. The correct ratio is 29.53. At all events the periodic return of full Moon and new 
Our information in regard to Moon-worship among the peoples of Mesopotamia is even more explicit. The Moon (Sin) was rendered homage far earlier than the Sun (Shamash). The following translation of a hymn in cuneiform letters I quote from L. Bergstr?m, who published a study on ¡°Semitic Moon-Worship¡± in Nordisk Tidskrift, 1909:
Oh, Sin, thou who alone givest light,
Thou, who bringest light to men,
Thou, who showest favour to the dark-tressed ones,
Thy light shines on the firmament,
Thy torch illuminates like fire,
Thy radiance fills the wide earth.
Oh, heavenly Anu, whose insight and wisdom no one comprehends,
Thy light is splendid as Shamash, thy firstborn,
Before thee prostrate the great gods themselves in the dust
For on thee rests the fate of the world.
Anu was god of the heaven and seems here to stand for god in general. Sin was father to the daughter Shamash, who in this hymn already is considered almost comparable to the father. Later on during the Hammurabi-dynasty (about 2000 B.C.) the Sun, Shamash, was accepted as supreme god, but the 
Our information in regard to Moon-worship among the peoples of Mesopotamia is even more explicit. The Moon (Sin) was rendered homage far earlier than the Sun (Shamash). The following translation of a hymn in cuneiform letters I quote from L. Bergstr?m, who published a study on ¡°Semitic Moon-Worship¡± in Nordisk Tidskrift, 1909:
Oh, Sin, thou who alone givest light,
Thou, who bringest light to men,
Thou, who showest favour to the dark-tressed ones,
Thy light shines on the firmament,
Thy torch illuminates like fire,
Thy radiance fills the wide earth.
Oh, heavenly Anu, whose insight and wisdom no one comprehends,
Thy light is splendid as Shamash, thy firstborn,
Before thee prostrate the great gods themselves in the dust
For on thee rests the fate of the world.
Anu was god of the heaven and seems here to stand for god in general. Sin was father to the daughter Shamash, who in this hymn already is considered almost comparable to the father. Later on during the Hammurabi-dynasty (about 2000 B.C.) the Sun, Shamash, was accepted as supreme god, but the 
leave the observations from each receding phase fresh in memory,¡ªboth these phenomena contribute toward the high value of the Moon¡¯s synodic revolution as a measure of protracted time duration. The purely practical need dominates, not, probably, any desire to visualize the changes in legends. The Australian negroes use four different names for the Moon according to its four quarters, showing that they, in all probability, believe themselves confronted with four different stellar bodies, just as the Greeks at the time of Homer considered the morning- and the evening-star, i. e. Venus, as two separate planets.
On the other hand, no ground worth mentioning supports the theory that the scorching heat of the Sun diminished the peoples¡¯ inclination for its worship. On the contrary, homage was generally rendered to phenomena one feared. It is further not true that the Babylonians themselves considered the Sun, Shamash, hostile, the Moon, Sin, friendly. The Sun-god, Shamash, by virtue of his light, was believed to give life and health. The scorching quality of the Sun was attributed to another god, Nergal, prince of the underworld, demon of war and slaughter, source of fever, and, pre-eminently, of plague. No reason existed, therefore, why Shamash should take second rank after Sin, who is said ¡°to carry water and fire,¡± meaning, according to Schrader, that he brought fits of ague and fever. When the Sun after the oppressive day sinks behind the horizon, it is well known that a sharp fall of temperature occurs, particularly in arid zones, but also in humid regions within the tropics where this very phenomenon is utilized for the production of ice. He who exposes himself to the sudden cold of the night falls an easy prey to illness. Particularly is this true under a clear sky¡ªprimitive people say ¡°when the Moon 
shines¡±¡ªbecause of the strong radiation. Those who sleep in moonlight are struck by delirium and madness according to primitive thought, an opinion by no means dead among civilized nations¡ªit is common with seafaring men¡ªand is no doubt the origin of the expression: moonstruck (German: mondsuchtig, Ital.: lunatico, French: lunatique, Swedish: m?nadsrasande, etc.). To this belief has probably contributed the fact that epileptic fits frequently possess a period nearly corresponding to the synodical month, which, as I have shown elsewhere, most likely depends on a periodic change in the atmospheric electricity.
In this connection it might also be stated that the third among the great star-deities, Ishtar, the queen of heaven (Astarte, Venus), was the mild but potent, all-merciful sister in every affliction, who delivered from sorcery and illness and gave pardon for sin and guilt. This radiant goddess, who corresponds to the attractive figure of the Catholics¡¯ Virgin Mary, was, in spite of her solicitude for the afflictions of men, placed third in the illustrious triad, Sin, Shamash, and Ishtar.
The traveller in the desert is certainly often tortured by the severe drought and a consequent insufferable thirst. This, however, was justly ascribed to the scarcity of water and not to the Sun. The Egyptians, therefore, wished that their departed ones on the journey to their new dwelling-places would meet with refreshing springs where they might quench their thirst and northerly winds that might cool the air. It is well known that the Mohammedans have formed similar conceptions of a paradise in life to come.
Entirely new conditions arose when the population grew until agriculture became a necessity for the production of sufficient food. The influence of the Sun now became so 
dominating that it must be given the first place among the powers that affect the fates of men. The plants have a decided annual period and so have the overflows of the rivers which were of the utmost importance in those countries where the cradle of civilization stood. The rainfalls themselves were of annual recurrence as were also the intervening droughts. In Egypt the great importance of the floods caused the introduction of the solar year at a very early stage and its length was fixed at 12 months of 30 days, or 360 days, so that the beginning of the year occasionally had to be adjusted. This was accomplished by resorting to observations of the rising and setting of the Dog Star or Sirius. Thus we realize how difficult it was to determine the exact length of the solar year from everyday phenomena. The great reformer Amenhotep IV. endeavoured about 1400 B.C. to have the Sun-god recognized as sole master of all the world. He met, however, with such great obstacles on the part of the conservative priesthood, which as they largely were serving different gods would have lost part of their power if the reform had prevailed, that his successor was obliged to yield to the solid opposition.
In Babylon the local god Marduk, once representative of the planet Jupiter, and among the star-gods ranking next to the three Super-gods, became about 2000 B.C. elevated to the highest position among the gods and assumed at the same time the dignity of Sun-god. It may here be mentioned that Marduk also played a great part as healer of illness. The evolution in ancient Rome followed the same course although at a far later time. Emperor Aurelianus (270¨C275 A.D.) under the influence of oriental Mithras-cult elevated the Sun-god to supreme god of the whole Roman Empire, which then comprised almost the entire known world.
Especially significant is the fact that Venus with the Mexicans played as important a part as did the Moon and the Sun. The luminosity of Venus, unlike that of planets outside of the earth¡¯s orbit, but like that of the Moon, changes from a maximum, intense enough in the tropics to throw a shadow, down to a minimum which approaches complete darkness. Its period is closely 1.6 years. It falls short of this figure by about two hours and the Mexicans therefore introduced a correction similar to the bissextile day in our leap year, of one day in every twelve years, which day, however, had to be deducted instead of added. Observations of the changing luminosity of Venus and of its position relative to the Sun obviously lent themselves admirably to measurements of long periods of time and particularly to determination of the length of the important solar year as five Venus-periods very nearly equal eight solar years. The Mexican priests established the fact that 104 solar years correspond to 65 Venus-periods or 146 ¡°Tonalamatl.¡±
Star-cult was as strongly developed in Mexico as in Babylon. Its main doctrine is stated by Alfredo Chavero thus: ¡°The Father-Creator was Heaven, Xiuhtecutli, or the Azure-blue master. The mother was Omecihuatl, the Milky Way, or the dual mistress.¡± It is well known that a large part of the Milky Way, from the ¡°Swan¡± to the neighbourhood of the Southern Cross, is divided in two parallel branches, which fact probably is responsible for the title, the ¡°Dual Mistress.¡± ¡°Heaven influenced the Milky Way through fire; from its cosmic matter the stars were set free, the most prominent of which were Tonatiuh, the Sun; Tezcatlipoca, the Moon; and Quetzalcoatl, Venus. These were made the supreme gods. For the purpose of worship, they were symbolized in human 
shape. Myriads of images, representing these star-gods, were modelled in clay, wood, or stone.¡±
According to this remarkable picture the Mexicans should have arrived at a far better solution of the world-riddle than even the Babylonians did. While most other peoples assumed heaven and earth as the original principles, they gave the high position of progenitress of all to the Milky Way. From her the innumerable stars, with the Sun in the lead, issued. This agrees to a considerable extent with the present conception which we have arrived at during this very last decade, principally thanks to the work of American astronomers. Their investigations have shown how the stars are segregated from the nebulous primeval matter of the Milky Way; how they add distance between themselves and their matrix with age, while simultaneously they develop an increasing individuality.
We have seen that Venus-Ishtar was honoured with membership in the august triad of star-gods, also among the Babylonians. Their successors, the Assyrians, retained the inherited traditions. Thus their kings in the ninth century before Christ symbolized their divine lineage by wearing a necklace with a moon-crescent in the middle, a cross in a ring, emblem of the Sun, on one side, and on the other a star, emblem of Venus (compare Montelius, Nordisk Tidskrift, 1904, p. 13, fig. 30). The Jewish synagogues are generally decorated with the star-emblem.
The Mohammedans, like the Jews, utilize the position of the Moon for determination of the Church calendar, and we employ the same means for fixing Easter time. The Mohammedans reckon with a year of 12 synodical months. Twelve such months contain only 354.4 days while a solar year comprises 365.24 days, and as a rule, therefore, the 
synodical month was rounded to 30 days instead of 29.53 and the solar year to 360 days. Such was the arrangement in Egypt and originally also in Babylon. Primitive men comprehend fractions only with extreme difficulty. In order to correct the discrepancies, odd months were introduced about every sixth year.
From this time we may trace the high reputation of the number twelve. The Zodiac was divided into twelve houses in each of which the Sun was to dwell a month at a time. Day and night were each divided into twelve hours. The circle was divided into 360 degrees corresponding to the number of days of the year, so that the position of the Sun at noon should proceed one degree of the heaven from day to day. As the Moon dominated chronometry, a complication which must have caused considerable confusion was in many places introduced. We have seen that the Australian negroes gave four different names to the Moon in its four different phases. The great change in appearance of the Moon from quarter to quarter makes such a division natural. The synodical month was therefore made to consist of four parts, called weeks. As the length of a month is 29.53 days, the nearest number evenly divisible by four, namely 28, was substituted, and so seven days were allotted to each week, thus introducing an error of not less than 5.5%.
To the establishment of this week the assumption of seven wandering stars has no doubt largely contributed. The priests had discovered that besides Sun, Moon, and Venus, four other stars shift their position on the firmament with reference to the fixed stars, which latter appear always to maintain their relative distances. These four wandering stars were Mercury, Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn. Each day in the week was dedicated to one of the seven wandering stars and 
received its name. These names have been maintained to the present day, for instance, Sunday, the Sun¡¯s day, Monday, the Moon¡¯s day, etc. The lunar calendar, established through religious considerations, supplanted the more rational one, which latter, however, survived in Egypt, and was reinstated in the Occident during the French revolution, although unfortunately only for a short time (1793¨C1805). As a result, the synodical month, in order to suit the calendar, has been changed not only with half a day to thirty days, but also with one and a half days to twenty-eight days. If decades had been adhered to we would have had months of even thirty days and either five leap months of thirty-one days each (during leap year six) or half a decade interpolated at new year.
Besides the seven wandering stars known to antiquity (at present over eight hundred planets have been observed), several other stars and constellations played an important 
South Pole as Sirius, have both evoked the attention and the worship of the primitive people, in this case the South Africans.
At length, the nations, particularly the Babylonians and the Mexicans, acquired a wider knowledge of the different stars. As the most important ones, Sun, Moon, and Venus, guided the seasons and hence all natural phenomena, a certain mundane significance was naturally ascribed also to the younger ones. Not only seasons, months, days, and hours were each ruled by its star, but so was everything in nature; different winds, provinces, trades, bodily organs, animals, persons, each possessed its star and celestial protector. Comprehensive studies of these correspondences and connections were made and the conclusions were drawn from immaterial semblances and often wholly arbitrarily,¡ªas regards persons from the configuration of the stars at the time of birth. Thus grew an enormously extensive collection of correspondence- and sympathy-doctrines accompanied by a detailed symbolism, an entire quasi-science, which must never be questioned as it originated with the infallible priests. With the Babylonians, religion and science completely melted together and even art was entirely subservient to the same interests. Occasionally the loss of this blissful state draws forth a sigh. Fortunately it is gone never to return.
The oriental wisdom was brought over to Greece and was there amalgamated with the Platonic-Aristotelian philosophy. In this form the Babylonian heritage held sway over the thought of mankind up to less than 200 years ago. The most important branches of this fanciful, so-called science were astrology and alchemy. Tycho Brahe himself made it the object of his life to strengthen astrology by contributing new material to it. Kepler is said not to have 
believed in astrology but he nevertheless cast horoscopes not only for princes and persons of high position in order to improve his economy, but also for his own family. Probably traces of the old superstition clung to him, and presumably he thought: ¡°If it does no good, neither does it do any harm.¡±
In the same manner, alchemy was carried on by faithful adepts, but more often by impostors, seldom averse to ¡°occult¡± sciences. Astrologers and alchemists exist even yet among the numerous devotees to occultism; at high price many of them make their predictions or sell their secrets. I have heard a Swedish engineer of very high standing state that their prognostications agreed with events. Among the few alchemists in Europe, most of whom seem to be religious visionaries, Strindberg is of a certain interest to us. Correspondence-theory has played a very large part in the speculations of the learned up to comparatively recent time. It is utilized extensively in the later fantastic writings of Swedenborg. Numerous traces are to be found also in the weakest works of Strindberg.
The renowned French chemist, Berthelot, has given a valuable analysis of the alchemist¡¯s method of treating chemical phenomena. His general conclusion is that the false principles which led the alchemists astray revert back to Plato¡¯s and Aristotle¡¯s philosophical theories regarding the composition of matter. Something similar can be said of astrology. It plays with ideas of its own fabrication with hardly any foundation in reality. The result is almost wholly without value.
The greatest astronomer in Babylon, Kidinnu (about 200 B.C.), constructed tables of great accuracy giving the position of the stars. In this work he utilized observations gathered over thousands of years. These ephemerides were also 
intended as scripture source for reading the fate of men and for determination of the auspicious moment for the commencement of an undertaking. At all events, they placed great revenue and power over souls in the hands of the ruling priesthood. It does not appear that these priests were able to rise to an attempt of a physical explanation as to the nature of the stellar bodies. That was probably also considered dangerous. The stars were deities composed of purer and more refined matter than found on Earth. It were not improbable that the gods would inflict vengeance on the presumptuous one who dared to intrude upon their secrets and pass judgment on their peculiarities.
Fortunately, there existed in Greece another tendency in philosophy besides the scholastic and the Platonic-Aristotelian. But this was mainly represented in southern Italy, Sicily, and later in Alexandria. Already the followers of Pythagoras had made important progress toward a solution of the stellar problems. The crowning point was reached by Aristarchos from Samos, who lived in Alexandria about 2100 years ago. He established 1700 years before Copernicus the heliocentric system. It is often said that his work was of little value, as Copernicus nevertheless must do it over again. It is then forgotten that Copernicus himself cites the philosophers of antiquity who expressed theories in agreement with the heliocentric system and expressly states that he was bold enough to advance his hypotheses because so many prominent authorities could be mentioned who favoured them. Copernicus did not dare entirely to break away from the Ptolemaic system, and was inconsistent enough partly to use it in his calculations of the motions of the stars.
We have lately advanced farther along the road of Pythagoras and Aristarchos, of Copernicus and Galileo, and 
we have perfected their methods to a high degree. Progress in astronomy and kindred sciences is nowadays made at a dizzying speed if measured with the standard of antiquity. Occasionally we hear a warning voice asking us to show more deference to a philosophy directly descending from the Platonic-Aristotelian. He who is at all familiar with the history of natural science will understand us when we answer: ¡°We have had more than enough thereof.¡±
That non-naturalists sometimes have a peculiar conception of the present status of astronomy is well illustrated by the statement of one of our foremost theologians in a review of a popular astronomical work where he remarked that the astronomer of today had not advanced much beyond those of ancient time who also could forecast eclipses of the Sun. The predictions were then founded on the recurrences of eclipses after regular intervals 
was pushed away by the incensed goddess, the milk was spread across the sky.
Nevertheless, the human race, until about two hundred years ago, had little conception of the extraordinary importance of the Milky Way. Anaxagoras and Democritos surmised, however, that it consists of a collection of exceedingly minute and densely clustered stars each of which has the nature of our Sun. Ptolemy described, nearly two thousand years ago, its position on the firmament and his observations are valid today as far as determinations with the naked eye suffice. When Galileo introduced the telescope, the conception of the Milky Way as made up of innumerable stars was verified. Not quite two hundred years ago Swedenborg, in his cosmological speculations, considered our solar system as a part of the Galaxy. Wright, Kant, and Lambert further amplified these theories.
The first important forward step was taken by the great William Herschel in his statistical researches. He demonstrated that the stars lie closer to each other the nearer the Milky Way they are located. This is mainly true about the small stars invisible to the naked eye while the more luminous ones are more evenly distributed over the heavens. In certain parts of the Milky Way the stars are over one hundred times more crowded than at its poles¡ªthat is, the points farthest removed from the Galaxy. Herschel¡¯s investigations were continued and elaborated by Struve, and later by numerous other scientists.
Through these researches, it has been determined that the Milky Way is, so to speak, the foundation upon which the star system, visible to us, is built. All kinds of stellar bodies have been studied and their distribution has proved to be symmetrical with reference to the plane of the Galaxy. The 
majority is greatly concentrated around the Milky Way. To these belong the new stars which occasionally blaze into existence, as the well-known new star in Perseus, 1901, and nearly all of which have appeared in the Milky Way or in its immediate vicinity. We also find there the irregular nebul?, enormous, vastly diffused volumes of gas, among which the best known is the Orion nebula, and which seem to constitute the primeval matter out of which the stars are born. We might further mention the star-clusters, dense, ball-shaped agglomerations of stars, and the so-called planetary nebul?, which¡ªat least in their visible outer shell¡ªalso consist of gas accumulations with a spherical or ellipsoid conformation. The numerous spiral nebul? on the other hand, those strange stellar bodies to which we later shall have occasion to return, are beyond comparison more frequent in the regions surrounding the poles of the Galaxy than in the rest of the heavens.
Many astronomers have considered the Milky Way itself a nebula. The most common theory doubtless is that it closely conforms to a spiral nebula¡ªan opinion that has found a particularly warm advocate in the Dutch astronomer, Easton (see Figure 1). A few years ago Prof. Bohlin expressed the view that it is most akin to a planetary nebula, or more precisely to a ring nebula which is supposed to grow out of a planetary ellipsoid nebula by the gaseous matter being driven from its poles toward its equator. It is of a certain interest that this theory lends itself to the support of Swedenborg¡¯s¡ªnevertheless improbable¡ªhypothesis about the origin of the planets in the solar system. As we later shall see the Easton conception has the better reasons in its favour.
If classified according to age the stars are again distributed with the Milky Way as a reference point. Thus, let us consider their evolution, which for various reasons is assumed to take the following course. We may commence when the star-matter existed on the nebula stage. It then radiated the light characteristic of certain incandescent gases, principally the lightest two, hydrogen and helium, and further of an otherwise unknown gas called nebulium (nebula-substance). These gases were later condensed and dark spectral lines commenced to appear beside the bright lines of the aforesaid gases. Stars on this stage, named after their discoverer Wolf-Rayet stars, occur only in the immediate vicinity of the Milky Way. A later stage in their evolution is represented by the so-called helium stars in whose spectrum the dark helium lines preponderate. They are considerably concentrated around our Galaxy. Somewhat more evenly distributed and yet of decidedly greater frequence in the neighbourhood of the Milky Way, the hydrogen stars appear, characterized by strongly developed hydrogen lines and somewhat retreating helium lines. These stars are more developed than the helium stars and form with them the group of white stars so named after the colour of their light. Next in evolution follow the yellow stars, to which our Sun belongs. Dark metal lines appear in their spectrum. They are more evenly distributed than the groups mentioned before. Still further is this true about the red stars whose spectra contain the characteristic bands of chemical compounds and therefore betray comparatively advanced cooling. They are fairly uniformly spread over the heavens but are still somewhat more numerous in the vicinity of the Milky Way than further therefrom.
These facts are demonstrated in the statistics by E. C. Pickering, Director of the Harvard Observatory, who divided the firmament in four equal zones, the first of which is nearest to the Milky Way (and includes it) and the last of which contains the Galactic poles. His table shows the percentages of different stars in each of the four zones.
distribution would correspond to 25 per cent. in all four divisions of the heavens.
These comprehensive statistics, embracing 6106 stars, seem to indicate that the stars in their first stage were within the Milky Way but subsequently drifted away with increasing age. This leads us to the thought that they originated from the irregular, nebulous accumulations which occur in the Milky Way and in its vicinity, or more correctly from similar formations which formerly existed in these regions but which now have clustered into stars. This agrees very well with another observation. With the help of the spectroscope the motion of different stars has been determined with reference to the point where the sun now is. The velocities have been found greater the older the stars are as shown in the table below taken mainly from the investigations of the renowned astronomer, Campbell.
the other groups. Campbell¡¯s statistics include also for this reason a smaller number of stars in this class than in the others. It is conceivable and by the astronomer Halm held to be true that the mean velocity of the smaller stars is greater than that of the larger ones. This is the condition existing in a mixture of different gas molecules, with which the brilliant French scientist, Henri Poincar¨¦, compared the throng of stars, inasmuch as the heavier molecules possess the slower motion. To confirm this W. S. Adams of the Carnegie Observatory on Mount Wilson compared stars of equal velocity in their own orbits. Such stars are considered to be on the average equally far removed from us. He found the theory of Halm confirmed. The mean velocity of the hydrogen stars was reduced from 11 km. (6.8 miles) to 7.5 km. (4.7 miles), that of the yellow stars from 15 km. (9.3 miles) to 9.2 km. (5.8 miles), and that of the red stars from 17 km. (11.5 miles) to 14 km. (8.7 miles), while that of the helium stars remained unchanged. The sequence of the stars arranged according to velocity in the line of sight is evidently not modified by this new calculation.
In regard to the motion of the planetary nebul? it should be mentioned that Campbell in this connection has carried out a great number of new determinations according to which the mean observed velocity of these large bodies in the line of sight must be increased to not less than 42 km. (26 miles) per second.
Campbell and Moore contribute the following interesting data in regard to Nebula N. G. C. 7009 (Fig. 2):
¡°Measures of the rotational velocity of the nebula enable us to draw some interesting conclusions concerning its mass. On the most plausible assumption as to the location of the axis of rotation the orbital speed of the nebular materials lying at a distance of 9 seconds of arc from the centre is about 6 km. (3.7 miles) per second. If we provisionally assume the mass of the central nucleus to equal that of the Sun, Kepler¡¯s law connecting the periodic time with the distance from the nucleus tells us definitely that the nebula is distant from us only 8.9 light years. This must be regarded as an improbably small value, in view of other evidence bearing on the question. For assumed distances of 100 and 1000 light years, which we have reason to believe are more probable orders of nebular distance, the masses of the nebula would be respectively 11.3 and 113 times that of the Sun, and the corresponding periods of rotation 1371 and 13,710 years. From these considerations it seems certain that the mass of the planetary nebula N. G. C. 7009 is several times that of the Sun. The nebula is therefore competent, from the point of view of its mass, to develop into a system more pretentious than is our solar system.
¡°A few speculations concerning this nebula may not be without interest and value.
¡°The faint extensions to the east and to the west of the elliptical figure suggest an encircling ring of materials whose principal plane, passing through the nucleus, passes also near our (the observers¡¯) position in space. These extensions terminate in condensed nuclei at equal distances from the nucleus and on exactly opposite sides of the nucleus. The faint extensions and condensations may be and probably are largely the effect of the edgewise projection of such a ring, as in the case of Saturn¡¯s rings when the observer is in the plane of the rings. The forms of the two terminating condensations, and especially the wing extending up and out from the east condensation, suggest that we are not precisely in the plane of the assumed ring.
¡°The form of the main nebula appears to be ellipsoidal and not chiefly elliptical.
¡°The space immediately surrounding the central nucleus appears to be relatively vacuous. Aside from the nucleus, the principal mass of visible nebulosity exists in the brilliant ring, roughly elliptical as to its inner and outer boundaries, which occupies the region about midway between the nucleus and the outer edge of the nebular structure. The brilliant ring is probably in reality an ellipsoidal shell; the projection of such a shell upon a plane at right angles to the line of sight would naturally show a relatively dark central area, but the projection principle may not be the only one involved.
¡°If this nebula is in process of development into a solar system, the indications are for a system having certain resemblances to our solar system. Our four outer planets have a combined mass 225 times as great as that of the four inner planets. Similarly in N. G. C. 7009, there is apparently a paucity of material to form planets near the nucleus and an abundance of material for planets at greater distances from the nucleus.¡±
Fig. 2. Planetary nebula N.G.C. 7009 (composite drawing, from Curtis¡¯s photographs of the nebula made with the Crossley reflecting telescope. The scale is in seconds of arc).
From Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of U. S. A.
Interesting observations have been presented recently also with reference to the largest among the irregular nebul?, namely the Orion nebula. Three astronomers in Marseilles, Bourget, Fabry, and Buisson, found that parts of this nebula, in the neighbourhood of the so-called trapeze and very close to each other, moved with different velocities and that this difference might amount to 10 km. (6.2 miles) per second. The south-easterly part approaches us while the north-easterly recedes from us. Consequently a violent whirl-motion undoubtedly takes place in this region. This observation has been verified by the well-known Chicago astronomer, Frost, who employed a different method of investigation than his predecessors. He noted differences in velocity amounting to 11 km. (6.8 miles) per second between points not over two seconds of arc distant from the trapeze.
If therefore we say that the irregular nebul? on the average possess no motion, this statement does not preclude important local deviations from the rule within the nebul?, intimating a transformation which probably leads to the concentration of the nebulous matter toward the centre of the whirl.
Leaving out, to begin with, the planetary nebul?, it appears that the original matter of the stars stands still in space, that their average velocity increases with increasing age and approaches a mean value of about 18 km. per second or roughly 1000 times the speed of the ordinary passenger train. Our Sun, in particular, moves with a velocity of 20 km. (12.4 miles) per second toward a point in the constellation Hercules 30 degrees north of the equator.
What force then shall we say it is that causes the motion of the stars? As far as we know none but gravitation. It 
axis of rotation the orbital speed of the nebular materials lying at a distance of 9 seconds of arc from the centre is about 6 km. (3.7 miles) per second. If we provisionally assume the mass of the central nucleus to equal that of the Sun, Kepler¡¯s law connecting the periodic time with the distance from the nucleus tells us definitely that the nebula is distant from us only 8.9 light years. This must be regarded as an improbably small value, in view of other evidence bearing on the question. For assumed distances of 100 and 1000 light years, which we have reason to believe are more probable orders of nebular distance, the masses of the nebula would be respectively 11.3 and 113 times that of the Sun, and the corresponding periods of rotation 1371 and 13,710 years. From these considerations it seems certain that the mass of the planetary nebula N. G. C. 7009 is several times that of the Sun. The nebula is therefore competent, from the point of view of its mass, to develop into a system more pretentious than is our solar system.
¡°A few speculations concerning this nebula may not be without interest and value.
¡°The faint extensions to the east and to the west of the elliptical figure suggest an encircling ring of materials whose principal plane, passing through the nucleus, passes also near our (the observers¡¯) position in space. These extensions terminate in condensed nuclei at equal distances from the nucleus and on exactly opposite sides of the nucleus. The faint extensions and condensations may be and probably are largely the effect of the edgewise projection of such a ring, as in the case of Saturn¡¯s rings when the observer is in the plane of the rings. The forms of the two terminating condensations, and especially the wing extending up and out from the east 
condensation, suggest that we are not precisely in the plane of the assumed ring.
¡°The form of the main nebula appears to be ellipsoidal and not chiefly elliptical.
¡°The space immediately surrounding the central nucleus appears to be relatively vacuous. Aside from the nucleus, the principal mass of visible nebulosity exists in the brilliant ring, roughly elliptical as to its inner and outer boundaries, which occupies the region about midway between the nucleus and the outer edge of the nebular structure. The brilliant ring is probably in reality an ellipsoidal shell; the projection of such a shell upon a plane at right angles to the line of sight would naturally show a relatively dark central area, but the projection principle may not be the only one involved.
¡°If this nebula is in process of development into a solar system, the indications are for a system having certain resemblances to our solar system. Our four outer planets have a combined mass 225 times as great as that of the four inner planets. Similarly in N. G. C. 7009, there is apparently a paucity of material to form planets near the nucleus and an abundance of material for planets at greater distances from the nucleus.¡±
Fig. 2. Planetary nebula N.G.C. 7009 (composite drawing, from Curtis¡¯s photographs of the nebula made with the Crossley reflecting telescope. The scale is in seconds of arc).
From Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of U. S. A.
Interesting observations have been presented recently also with reference to the largest among the irregular nebul?, namely the Orion nebula. Three astronomers in Marseilles, Bourget, Fabry, and Buisson, found that parts of this nebula, in the neighbourhood of the so-called trapeze and very close to each other, moved with different velocities and that this difference might amount to 10 km. (6.2 miles) per second. The south-easterly part approaches us while the north-easterly recedes from us. Consequently a violent whirl-motion undoubtedly takes place in this region. This observation has been verified by the well-known Chicago astronomer, Frost, who employed a different method of investigation than his predecessors. He noted differences in velocity amounting to 11 km. (6.8 miles) per second between points not over two seconds of arc distant from the trapeze.
If therefore we say that the irregular nebul? on the average possess no motion, this statement does not preclude important local deviations from the rule within the nebul?, intimating a transformation which probably leads to the concentration of the nebulous matter toward the centre of the whirl.
Leaving out, to begin with, the planetary nebul?, it appears that the original matter of the stars stands still in space, that their average velocity increases with increasing age and approaches a mean value of about 18 km. per second or roughly 1000 times the speed of the ordinary passenger train. Our Sun, in particular, moves with a velocity of 20 km. (12.4 miles) per second toward a point in the constellation Hercules 30 degrees north of the equator.
What force then shall we say it is that causes the motion of the stars? As far as we know none but gravitation. It 
appears therefore as if the gaseous primeval substance of the stars were not governed by this force. It might prove hazardous, however, to make this assumption as gases also possess weight and even the most rarefied strata of the Earth¡¯s atmosphere exert barometric pressure by virtue of their attraction to the mass of the earth. Rather the immobility of the nebul? is due to the frequent collisions between the molecules in any quantity of gas even if it be attenuated to such a high degree as in the nebul?. Thus, the molecules strike a balance, as it were, against each other so that the different parts of the gas accumulations shortly are brought to rest relative to each other. The irregular gas mists around the Milky Way form therefore a continuous whole. A different condition obtains in regard to condensed stellar bodies such as the stars. They may in the densest throng move during billions of years before they collide; but they might on the other hand enter nebulous masses and thereby suffer gradual retardation. We now refer to stars moving outside of the vapour clouds. They are therefore unrestricted and the longer they have obeyed gravitation without impeding encounters with nebulous matter, in other words the longer the time elapsed since they emerged from the gas accumulations which gave them birth, the swifter is their motion. Their (average) velocity can of course not exceed a certain limit which in our parts of the universe appears to be about 18 km. (11.2 miles) per second. Campbell¡¯s measurements show that for the youngest stars (all except the red) the velocity is greatest in the plane of the Milky Way, a natural enough condition as the attracting matter here is most abundant.
The planetary nebul? possess a greater velocity although they, as consisting of mist vapours, are in the first stage of 
evolution. Faster yet do the spiral nebul? move according to measurements by Wolf of Heidelberg. This shows that they are of a different nature from the irregular nebul?, which form the matrix of the Milky Way. A closer examination of the few¡ªthirteen in all¡ªplanetary nebul?, determined by the American astronomer Keeler, convinced me that they approach the Galaxy from its poles with a moderate speed, and subsequently under the influence of its attraction curve their orbit, rapidly gain in velocity, and finally rush into the nearest part of the Milky Way with a very high speed.
A great number of them are no doubt caught in the mists or star-throngs of the Milky Way after exposure to numerous collisions and sweeping away all matter in their course. Such clean-swept traces are very common in the area of the Milky Way. One of the most beautiful examples is the so-called Cocoon nebula in the constellation Cygnus (the Swan). It has left in its wake a dark rift, in whose bottom, however, exceedingly small and evidently very remote stars are visible according to the German astronomer Wolf (see Worlds in the Making, page 172, Fig. 55).
The great mean velocity of the planetary nebul? indicates that they originally did not belong to the Galactic system, a conclusion also reached by Bohlin, but for other reasons. They are nevertheless more abundant in the neighbourhood of the Milky Way than in other parts of the heavens. This fact, if viewed superficially, might lead to the belief that they are indigenous to the Galactic system, but is explained by their concentration in obedience to gravitation toward the Milky Way.
Quite recently (1917) Van Maanen determined the distance of one of these highly interesting celestial bodies, tabulated in the New General Catalogue as No. 7662. Its 
distance was found to be only about 140 light years. This is about sixteen times the distance of Sirius and the mean distance of a star of the fifth magnitude. This circumstance agrees very well with the idea that this nebula is captured by the Galactic system to which it has approached from very distant parts of the space outside of the Galactic system.
One of the most remarkable astronomical discoveries in recent years was made by Kapteyn, who thereby as well as by other achievements has gained perhaps the highest rank among astronomers of today. He has shown that the stars rushing forth in the neighbourhood of the Sun belong to two great groups, one coming from the constellation Orion, and the other at nearly a right angle (100¡ã) from the constellation Scorpio. In the former, we find nearly all the helium stars hitherto studied. We have previously seen that these stars stand almost still with reference to the Galaxy while the irregular nebul? possess no motion at all relative to the same reference point¡ªand the Galaxy is the natural datum-line for all astronomical measurements¡ªso that the motion of the first-mentioned star-group toward the Sun is principally due to the Sun¡¯s own motion. This group, according to Kapteyn, obeys the law of relative star velocities even better than the combined world of all stars; thus with reference to the Sun, the helium stars are the slowest, the yellow stars the fastest, while the hydrogen stars occupy a middle position, all a self-evident consequence of their own velocity with reference to the Galaxy which increases from helium stars to yellow stars.
Kapteyn has shown another regularity in this group which is easily explained. We have previously mentioned that the yellow stars are most, the helium stars least removed from their place of birth in the Milky Way. The result is that the yellow stars appear (on the average) to come from a point 
farther from the Galaxy than the apparent origin of the hydrogen stars and more remote yet than that of the helium stars. On account of the relatively high velocity of the yellow stars in different directions, their stream appears to be more divergent than the stream of hydrogen stars, and helium stars move in almost parallel paths (nearly directly opposed to the Sun¡¯s true motion with reference to the Galaxy).
Similar regularities have been found by Kapteyn in the second star-drift which would lead us to think, as indeed Kapteyn assumes, that these stars also developed from an original nebulous mist, which arrived in our neighbourhood from the unknown distant, but is now used up in the formation of corresponding stars. Here again the yellow stars should have departed farther from their matrix than the white hydrogen stars. Helium stars are very rare in this drift, so that no reliable statistics have as yet been made for them.
It has been one of the most difficult problems of cosmogony to form a theory to account for the origin of the Galactic system. We may, almost yearly, witness how new stars blaze into existence only to fade rapidly and in a few years return to their old insignificance¡ªthat is, they become invisible to the naked eye although through powerful lenses we may frequently discover an exceedingly faint star in their position. As a rule, a nebula of the planetary type is formed in the course of a few months. Somewhat later the nebula is transformed into a Wolf-Rayet star. It is interesting to note that Wright found the central bodies in certain planetary nebul? to be Wolf-Rayet stars. We have good reasons to assume this blazing forth into light to signify the collision of two faintly luminous or possibly extinct stars. The new lights appear also in stellar regions where the star density is very great, particularly in the Milky Way or its vicinity.
We see therefore repeatedly how mists with enclosed central stars originate. They remind us to a certain extent of the Galaxy with its clouds and stars and along the road thus suggested trials have been made to reach the solution of the riddle. The difficulty lies in the fact that the orbs whose collision create ¡°new stars¡± are small, probably smaller than our Sun, while the mass gathered in the Milky Way most likely is trillions2 of times greater than that of the Sun. It is true that we know a few unique stars, such as Arcturus, which exceed our Sun in size several tens of thousand times, but not even two such stars would account for the mass of the Galaxy, and furthermore the probability that two stellar bodies of such rare dimensions would collide is so very small that it must be left out of account.
Kapteyn¡¯s star-drifts, containing many thousands or probably millions of stars, appear to furnish the bridge that leads to the solution of the riddle of the Milky Way. These drifts were once enormous gas-clouds, in mass probably several million times greater than that of the Sun. They also had an extension equal to trillions of stars. The probability for the meeting of two such gas-drifts is comparatively large and should not be much smaller than for the entrance of a star-drift into the Milky Way, an occurrence which actually has happened as shown by Kapteyn.
When two such enormous gas-clouds meet, each with a cosmic velocity of about 20 km. per second, a long time 
would not elapse before the gas molecules in the region of interpenetration would be retarded in their original motions. An extraordinarily strong concentration and heating would occur in this territory, which is surrounded by the comparatively cold and heavy masses which remain unaffected because outside of the impact-area. A certain degree of equalization would naturally take place in the layers adjoining the boundary between active and inactive parts and the former would, furthermore, be set into a rapid spin around an axis perpendicular to the plane containing the two original motions. On account of the great viscosity of gases, particularly at high temperature, the central part would rotate as a coherent unit. Thus it would form a disk of gaseous matter. This disk would be thickest in the middle and would become thinner toward the edge where centrifugal force acts most powerfully.
Fig. 3. N.G.C. 4594. Exposure = 2 hours. 1mm = 6¡±7. 
From Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of U. S. A.
Such a discous nebula has been investigated by the astronomer F. G. Pease of the Carnegie Observatory on Mount Wilson. By means of the spectroscope he has studied the motion of Nebula No. 4594 in the New General Catalogue (see Fig. 3). This body is believed to be a spiral nebula like those in Figs. 4 and 5 but viewed from the side so that the spirals appear as a band. As the picture shows, this band is coursed through by a thick dark line, owing, it is believed, to a cold non-luminous dust-cloud outside of the spiral. The bright band is broadest in the centre. The curvature of the dark middle line in the shape of an arc, whose apex points downward, combined with the fact that the major portion of light falls above this arc, indicates that 
we do not view the nebula exactly on edge but from the upper (north) side of a plane through the arms of the nebula. The nucleus speeds away from us at the dizzying rate of 1180 km. (730 miles) per second. The east edge, i. e. the left on the picture, departs with the still higher velocity of 1630 km. (1100 miles) per second, while the west (right) edge retreats at the rate of only 800 km. (495 miles) per second. According to Pease, the nebula rotates as a solid disk so that the difference between the velocity of any point and that of the centre increases in the same proportion as the distance of the point in question from the centre. It is probable that we have been prevented from observing the outer parts, corresponding to the spiral arms proper, by the ring of dust which encircles the nebula. The visible portion occupies an arc of 2? minutes on each side of the centre. Its spectrum corresponds to that of star-group F-5 among the yellow stars in the Harvard classification. Therefore, it is not the light of the coherent gas-cloud which preponderates but rather that of the stars consolidated within the cloud, and corresponding to the stars in the Milky Way. This star-light is so bright that it entirely suppresses the radiation from the gas-cloud itself.
Such parts of the gas-aggregation as are most removed from the place of collision continue in their course through space little affected by the attraction of the central mass because of the great distance involved. The portions nearer the point of impact receive orbits curved by this same attraction and the curvature becomes the sharper the nearer the axis of rotation. One result of the mutual gravitation between the central mass and the particles in the outer sections of the nebula is also that the velocity in the spiral arms becomes smaller the farther the section in question is located from the centre, just as comets in the solar system 
move slower the farther they are removed from the Sun. But in all portions outside the central region the attraction is too weak to give circular orbits to the gaseous matter. All substance in these localities, therefore, departs ever more from the centre. As the spiral arms stretch out into straight lines such matter finally leaves the central disk altogether. It is possible that only the disk itself remains in the nebula computed by Pease.
Another astronomer on Mount Wilson, A. Van Maanen, has investigated a nebula, No. 101 in Messier¡¯s catalogue (Fig. 4). This nebula lies nearly at a right angle to the line of vision which consequently almost coincides with the axis of rotation. The motion of the different parts of this nebula has been calculated with the help of photographs taken in the years 1899, 1908, and 1914, whereby its changed position with reference to surrounding fixed stars has been recorded. Out of 87 points in the spirals only 9 moved in the direction of the hands on a clock while the other 78 moved in the opposite sense. The mean angular velocity is 0.022 seconds of arc per year, corresponding to 85,000 years for one complete revolution at 5 minutes¡¯ distance from the centre. The absolute velocity 2 minutes of arc from the centre is 1.5 times as great as at 7.5 minutes¡¯ distance.
Fig. 4 is reproduced from Van Maanen¡¯s original. It shows clearly the general regularity in the motion of the component parts as well as the numerous exceptions to the rule. Such exceptions may be caused by perturbations due to invading masses, which impart their own motion to the entangling matter. These foreign bodies have probably condensed surrounding vapours and this created the bright knots which stud the nebular spirals. The upward motion amounts on the average to 0.007 seconds per year. While the 
points of condensation describe half a revolution around the centre they depart therefrom to about twice their original distance. More than a million years is therefore likely to elapse before the outer portions of the nebula are so far removed from the nucleus that the spiral form of the nebula is no more apparent.
Fig. 4. Internal motions in Messier 101. The arrows indicate the direction and magnitude of the mean annual motions. Their scale (0¡±1) is indicated on the plate. The scale of the nebula is 1mm = 10¡±5. The comparison stars are enclosed in circles.
From Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of U. S. A.
Fig. 5. Spiral nebula No. 51 in Messier¡¯s Catalogue; situated in Canes Venatici, and photographed February 7 and 8, 1910, from Mount Wilson Observatory in California. Scale: 1 millimeter = 5 sec. arc.
It is clear that the Milky Way may have been formed through the collision of two immense nebulous gas-aggregations in the manner just described. Subsequently and by virtue of the magnitude of the Galaxy great quantities of wandering cosmic matter and minor stellar bodies have been gathered in occasionally accompanied by larger clusterings such as the planetary nebul? referred to.
How well justified we are in looking upon the Milky Way as a spiral nebula is apparent from the picture (Fig. 5) reproducing a photograph of the familiar regular nebula in the Dogs (Canes Venatici). It shows a wealth of detail hitherto not surmised. The feat was accomplished in the Carnegie Observatory on Mount Wilson in Southern California with the help of optical resources vastly superior to all earlier means. The Milky Way has previously been compared to this nebula, but due to deficient enlargement their striking similarity has not been fully recognized until now.
Assume the Sun located in the point marked ¡°S¡± in Fig. 5 and some distance above the plane of the picture, then the nebula if viewed from this point would appear somewhat as the Milky Way appears to us. In the middle we behold the substantial nucleus and on its left side a cleft between the two 
branches of the inner spiral. Farther to the left, we see only the outer spiral, first broadening toward the left where it approaches ¡°S,¡± then narrowing only to spread again on account of the great clustering in the lower right part of the spiral. The axis of the nebula corresponds to the densest parts of the Galaxy in Cygnus (the Swan), the loop in the inner spiral again to the empty space between Cepheus and Cassiopeia, the narrow part of the outer spiral branch resembles the constriction at Algenib, the following diffusion corresponds to the broad section in Auriga (Charioteer) and Monoceros (Unicorn). At the subsequent narrow place we see the outer nebula-clump corresponding in certain respects to the Magellanic clouds on our firmament although these are farther removed, and apparently not indigenous to the Milky Way. There follows in the nebula a massive section in our system represented by the well known, far less compact, yet brightly luminous tract containing the Southern Cross. Here, from the star Alpha in Centaurus¡ªthe nearest bright fixed star3 to our Sun, ¡°only¡± 4.5 light years or about 25 trillion4 miles distant¡ªcommences a bi-section of the spiral and strangely enough the nebula is similarly forked. Now the outer spiral stretching in a faint line upward from the ¡°clump¡± begins to show as a weak band, while the inner spiral stands forth powerfully above ¡°S¡± corresponding to the brilliant section of the Galaxy in Scutum (Shield) and Aquila (Eagle). The partition in the nebula between these two branches is the counterpart of the 110¡ã long ¡°prong¡± in the Milky Way between the constellations Norma and Lyra. Numerous faint bridges join the two branches in the nebula as well as in the Galaxy, according to Wolf.
The correspondence is indeed surprisingly good. Proportions are, of course, somewhat different¡ªin particular is the central part of the Galaxy not so predominating, which fact has been troublesome to the adherents of the nebula theory. Probably it was originally denser but has become attenuated through star-formation, explaining, for instance, the great gap between the constellations Lyra and Vulpecula.
To give a better idea of the structure of the Milky Way, two photographs are here reproduced as taken by Wolf, the German astronomer in Heidelberg, who has done particularly meritorious work in this department. One (Fig. 6) shows a section of the Galaxy in Cygnus (the Swan) with the star Deneb in the centre and to the left the ¡°Northamerican-nebula¡± so named from its shape. Above Deneb is the dark ¡°hole¡± in Cygnus and below another chasm not quite so black. Left of the ¡°hole¡± is the winding canal enclosing the so-called Cocoon nebula. (See Worlds in the Making, page 172.)
appears as if three or four stellar bodies here had stepped in from without, swept away the stars in their way, and left clean ¡°streets¡± behind. Probably other ¡°empty¡± spots in the neighbourhood have been formed in a similar manner. Another theory is that such dark places are caused by opaque mist-formations which shield the light of the stars behind from our sight.
Fig. 8. The trisected hole (Trifid-hole) in Eagle. Photo from M. Wolf of Heidelberg.
Through these pictures we gain a conception of the manner in which the present stars in the Milky Way have clustered out of the original misty chaos. We cannot avoid the idea of great exterior similarity between the lumps formed in curdling or souring milk and those which we observe in the Milky Way. The renowned French scientist Duclaux says in his micro-biology: ¡°In milk, commencing to sour, but yet entirely liquid, we observe under the microscope a precipitation of tiny particles. To begin with they are seen with difficulty and are discovered only by slightly displacing the plane of vision. Later they develop into distinct grains, characterized by Brownian movements, 
just like small particles of clay.... Still later the phenomenon appears as a steady molecular agglomeration. The grains have the tendency of the clay particles to lump and precipitate.¡±
The first condensation-nuclei in the mist-clouds are no doubt cosmic dust entering from without and perhaps also larger clusterings such as meteorites and comets. At the existing low temperature, surrounding gases condense into fluid state on the dust particles which by virtue of these moist shells are cemented into aggregations of such size that gravitation overcomes the repelling radiation pressure. Gravitation assisted by the retarding vapours further mass these aggregates together. This process of coalescence is accompanied by heat production. Finally, small stars are formed, then groups of such stars, while the spaces between, now comparatively devoid of matter, appear dark much as the whey between flocks of curd. As yet, the small stellar bodies are surrounded by quantities of dust and gas, which, however, with continued condensation become ever more rarefied. Even yet the big stars in Pleiades, belonging to the helium group, appear on the photographic plates interspaced with great patches of dust-clouds. These are now, however, so unsubstantial that they offer little impediment to the procession of the mighty stars. The condensation process may be greatly accelerated through the invasion of voluminous gas nebul? similar to the Cocoon nebula. At last all gases in the new star condense, that is to say the shell of tenuous vapours and dust contracts to such an insignificant thickness that it cannot be seen except possibly from the immediate vicinity. Small bodies ingathered through friction against the remnants of the original extended wrapping wander as planets around the new sun, sweeping away the 
last traces of unattached matter. The condensation on the new orb leaves a ¡°hole¡± in the nebulosity which in this way is transformed into stars and their satellites which emerge from the mist and scatter on the firmament.
The Milky Way appears to be in a rather advanced stage of this evolution.
The ¡°infinitely small¡± presents occasionally surprising likeness to the ¡°infinitely large.¡±
In this manner we can form a conception of the growth of the wonderful structure which has brought forth the majority of the stellar bodies that we discern. The spiral nebul? visible at the Galactic poles are similar formations but probably of far more modest dimensions. They may compare to the Milky Way as the smaller planets to the Sun. According to recent investigations the spiral nebul? seem also to possess an enormous velocity and they have probably invaded the Milky Way from without.
As previously stated, an exceedingly remarkable conception of the Milky Way exists among the Mexicans. To them it is the Matrix of all and gave birth to the stars, the most important of which are the Sun, the Moon, and Venus. This idea evidently agrees very well with the results of investigations in the last few years.
Finally, a few words about the extent of the Milky Way. So far we have not been able to measure it; only rather uncertain approximations are possible. Wolf estimates the diameter, that is the distance between the two spirals at the point where the Sun now is, to be about 10,000 times the distance from the Sun to the nearest fixed star, Alpha in Centaurus, which distance on the other hand is about 10,000 times the distance from the Sun to the remotest known 
planet, Neptune, or 300,000 times that from Sun to Earth. Expressed in the usual units, we arrive at 40,000 light years or 400,000 trillion kilometres (240,000 trillion miles). Lord Kelvin makes another estimate of 6000 light years, that is seven times smaller. The mean diameter of the nebula proper might be about five times larger, in round figures one hundred thousand light years, or one billion billion kilometres (600 million billion miles).
Like a monstrous octopus, the Milky Way swims in the fathomless ether-sea. Its dimensions are about as many times larger than those of the earth as that globe is larger than an atom. This has caused the gifted Irish physicist Fournier D¡¯Albe to consider the celestial globes as atoms, out of which systems of the order of the Milky Way are constructed in the same manner as the earth and other stellar bodies are upbuilt with atoms, invisible to us and yet measured with an incredible degree of accuracy.
Fournier D¡¯Albe goes further still. In poetic flight he does not hesitate to endow the Milky Way organism with life. Its evolution cannot be denied a certain similarity to the processes of life. The great nebula owes its origin to the union of two individuals, two nebulosities, who met in their course through boundless space. There floated the newborn extending its tentacles in the cool ether-waves and gained substance and strength through the smaller beings which the surging billows brought within its reach. It has now attained the zenith of its evolution, and is breaking up into molecules, or solar systems, which again are composed of stellar bodies, or atoms within the molecule. In violent exuberance of youth these rush through space in fulfilment of their individual life. Many will in due time undoubtedly become dust again and 
then serve to nourish a new youthful nebula. Others succumb to a freezing-death but will be restored to life in collision with a nebulosity or some other stellar body and give form to ¡°new stars¡± or planetary clouds. Again and again shall the starry mists go through the cycle of existence and after a lifetime, whose duration stands in proportion to their dimensions, i. e. may be estimated to billions of billions of years, give rise to new celestial beings. Thus shall it for ever continue in an eternal rhythm.
When Aristotle, for two thousand years our leading savant in cosmography, about twenty-three centuries ago stated the foundation of his natural science, he laid down as the important principles: moisture and heat and their opposites; because the four elements out of which everything was made, were: earth, characterized by dryness and cold; water, which was moist and cold; air, which combined 
moisture with heat; and lastly fire, which stood for dryness and heat. Undoubtedly he was considering the requisites of life, which may be designated as humidity and heat. We have seemingly agreed that all life originates in the sea, so that moisture can be considered the first requirement for its appearance on the earth. As to heat, life is destroyed by frost and favoured by increased warmth, at least to a certain point, about 35¡ã to 40¡ã C. (95¡ã to 104¡ã Fahrenheit), which temperature is most propitious to the development of life, while a further increase is detrimental, so that already below the boiling point of water life suffers more harm than at temperatures below freezing. In fact, the geologists have found that the different epochs in earth¡¯s evolution are best characterized by their humidity or dryness. To arrive at a clear conception in these matters we shall briefly survey our present knowledge of the importance for the evolution of life on earth that we should attach to the humid and to the dry periods or localities.
We are all familiar with the heavy, moisture-laden warmth which meets us when we enter a hothouse. It is particularly favourable to the growth of plants and to the prosperity of the lower animals. To the higher animals and to man, the humid heat is not so beneficial. In the open such hothouse air exists only in the tropics. Particularly the Congo region and the parts of Brazil adjoining the Amazon River are remarkable for their humid heat and for their fabulously luxuriant vegetation. From our greatest living climatologist, Julius Hann, I have borrowed the following description of such a clime:
¡°The changes of temperature between the coldest and the hottest month are very small in the Congo, from .5¡ã to 5¡ã C. (.9¡ã to 9¡ã Fahrenheit), with an average of about 3.5¡ã C. 
(6.3¡ã F.). The difference between day and night reaches nearly thrice this value, or 9.5¡ã C. (17.1¡ã F.). The dry season becomes shorter the more we approach the equator and in Equatorville and Bangala it shrinks to nothing. During the rainless months, a dense humid fog settles morning and evening over the savannahs. Low hanging clouds of uniform thickness frequently hide the Sun for weeks at a time. It is during the rainy season alone that we see a clear sky between the showers. This season opens and closes with magnificent thunderstorms coming from the east. In Luluaburg, lightning occurs during not less than 106 days in the year. In the dry season the wind carries with it clouds of dust which falls to the ground. The cloudiness is enormous in the Congo basin, so that there are veritably no months with a clear sky in this part of the world. In Vivi, the number of overcast days averages 74 per cent., fluctuating between 63 per cent. in August and 83 per cent. in November. The humidity is very high, varying in Vivi from 70 to 79 per cent., with a mean value of 75 per cent., and in Bolebo the mean itself reaches 79 per cent. During the rainy season, the heat is sometimes unbearably oppressive; suffocating fumes rise from vegetable matter which rapidly decays in the excessive humidity. The annual precipitation does not reach very startling figures; it varies between 120 and 180 cm. (47 to 71 inches). In Gabun, close by, the sky is almost continuously covered with clouds during the dry season.
¡°Corresponding regions in South America are in parts characterized by an even higher humidity. In Iquitos by the Amazon River, it reaches not less than 83 per cent. of saturation. The annual change of temperature is only about 5¡ã C. (9¡ã F.); in Para (1.08¡ã south latitude on the coast) it shrinks to 1¡ã or 1.5¡ã C. (1.8¡ã to 2.7¡ã F.). In the course of 
twenty-four hours the variation is considerably larger. The sky is remarkably clear between showers during the rainy season. In the interior of Guiana, the rains continue from the end of April well into July or even into August. Abundant dew is common during the rainless part of the year, thus maintaining the humidity. Sun and Moon are rarely visible, and gigantic lightning storms announce the arrival of the rainy period.¡±
Similar conditions apparently prevailed during the carboniferous period, which was characterized by a luxuriant vegetation. The mighty tree-trunks of that time fell into the water-covered marshes out of which they had grown and their decay was thereby prevented. Instead they turned into coal like the peat in the mosses of today. This was for some time thought to indicate that the temperature was not particularly high¡ªFrech estimated about 12¡ã C. (53.6¡ã F.) (1910). But since the discovery and subsequent description by Keilhack (1914) of peat-beds on Ceylon, where the average yearly temperature is 26¡ã C. (78.8¡ã F.), a return is to be expected to the older conception, which held that the vegetation during the carboniferous period is evidence of a very warm climate. Judging by the appearance of fossil plants, the temperature should have been nearly the same all over the globe. Carthaus remarks that the air was stirred by only feeble winds because the trees of that age with their great dimensions but frail root-systems could not have withstood a fresh breeze. The sky was hidden behind a continuous thick cover of clouds which only let a faint light sift through to the ground. The motionless air was almost saturated with moisture. The luxuriance of the vegetation, transcending anything existing today, indicates a favourable high percentage of carbonic acid in the air. This combined 
with the humidity and the dense clouds caused the heat radiation from the Sun to be almost entirely absorbed by the upper strata of the atmosphere in which thereby a strong circulation was maintained. As a result, the heat was nearly equalized between the poles and the equator and under the cloud cover an almost constant temperature reigned day and night, summer and winter. The damp air stood wellnigh still and was filled with dense fog at the smallest changes in temperature. Lack of light prevented the development of flowers, and the thriving plants belonged mainly to the ferns and to the horsetails. Pine and fir trees were yet comparatively few. The conditions in the swampy regions where plant life flourished were nearly identical with those in a hothouse if we were to draw a dense veil in front of the windows in walls and ceiling so that a continuous twilight would prevail.
In this uniform climate, plant life developed enormously faster than animal life. The dense clouds could store considerable quantities of heat in the equatorial belt through evaporation in their upper layers and the violent wind storms above the clouds would carry the aqueous vapours to colder regions where the heat would be liberated through new cloud formations. Currents in the oceans now largely attend to this heat transportation and give for instance to the coast of Norway, and indeed to the whole of Western Europe, its remarkably mild, and to life and civilization, propitious climate, but in the carboniferous age humid air currents fulfilled the same task. They moved considerably faster and more evenly than the ocean currents, were not checked or deflected by coasts or islands, and could therefore produce the extraordinarily uniform temperature and the marine climate all over the globe. Such a heat distribution takes 
place also in our days at a height of about 10,000 m. (6.2 miles) in the so-called ¡°stratosphere,¡± but the temperature here is very low, about -60¡ã C. (-76¡ã F.), so that the vapour suspended is hardly worth mentioning, and cannot give rise to cloud formations. The quantities of heat carried in these higher strata of the atmosphere are too insignificant to influence the masses of air below, whose temperature, therefore, is almost entirely governed by that of the sun-heated surface of the earth, except where the ocean currents equalize matters, as for instance in the almost wholly water-covered latitudes south of the 30th parallel on the Southern Hemisphere. Even during the carboniferous period at its height, there existed, of course, a temperature difference between pole and equator, but it was very small, some 10¡ã C. (18¡ã F.) perhaps. Undoubtedly, the formation of coal beds was mainly confined to those regions where the climate was most uniform all the year around.
The opposite extremity, the dry desert climate, is far more pronounced in the present time. This condition is well known in all continents except Europe, where we hardly can claim a desert but instead have steppes, with a vegetation abundant after the spring rains but fast disappearing with the arrival of the burning summer heat. A particular type of plant life has adapted itself to this periodic change from rain to drought, from bitter cold during the winter to parching sun during the summer. Perennial plants, and particularly trees, can rarely endure the rigors of such climatic upheavals. Animal life on the other hand has proved fairly adaptable and displays considerable wealth.
This steppe climate is only an intermediate stage towards the desert climate proper, which is hostile to all life. Its 
temperature is subject to enormous changes in the course of the day and the year. The annual variation is less pronounced near the equator and the daily variation less on the approach to the poles, on account of the small changes in the sun¡¯s radiation during corresponding periods. The difference between day and night in Sahara is frequently 30¡ã to 40¡ã C. (50¡ã to 70¡ã F.). The lowest temperature observed by Foureau-Lamy, 1898¨C1899, was -20¡ã C. (-4¡ã F.) or nearly the same as on the Scandinavian coasts. The highest amounted to 48¡ã C. (118.4¡ã F.) or a total variation of nearly 70¡ã C. (126¡ã F.). In Upper Egypt (21.9¡ã N. Lat.) the mean temperature changed from 16.3¡ã C. (61.3¡ã F.) in January to 34.1¡ã C. (93.2¡ã F.) in July, and nearer the equator in Central Africa (8.1¡ã N. Lat., 23.6¡ã E. Long.) the difference amounted to only 6.9¡ã C. (44.6¡ã F.), 22.7¡ã C. (72.5¡ã F.) in December, 29.6¡ã C. (85.1¡ã F.) in April, while in Kiachta (50.4¡ã N. Lat., 106.5¡ã E. Long.) in Siberia, the yearly change reaches 45¡ã C. (81¡ã F.), -26.6¡ã C. (-15.7¡ã F.) in January, 19.1¡ã C. (66.2¡ã F.) in July. The average daily variation at continental stations is about 12¡ã C. (21.6¡ã F.). All this refers to the temperature of the air, while the surface temperature in the course of twenty-four hours may change 50¡ã C. (90¡ã F.) and in the desert even more. Frost occurs in the Sahara as late as May when the maximum temperature may reach 50¡ã C. (122¡ã F.). While in Scandinavia the diurnal difference between highest and lowest temperature averages only 6¡ã to 7¡ã C. (11¡ã to 13¡ã F.), a maximum in July of 10.4¡ã C. (18.7¡ã F.) and a minimum in November of 4¡ã C. (7.2¡ã F.), Hedin on his journey in Tibet, 1899¨C1902, observed a daily variation of 19¡ã C. (34.2¡ã F.) and no appreciable difference with change in altitude.
The result of such a violent temperature change in the course of a day is a breaking up of the rocks which 
subsequently and gradually are ground to fine dust by unobstructed winds wherever vegetation does not bind the soil. In this manner the sand deserts are formed. The arid wastes of Asia have lately been vividly described by Sven Hedin. The mountains eroded by the sandstorms resemble dilapidated ruins, standing as monuments of an ancient highland. The sand in East Turkestan is reduced to such a fine powder that it can float in the air for several days after a storm, revealing itself in gorgeous sunsets. Winds sweep the sand into long dunes, which shift in the direction of the blast. It is ferruginous and therefore red or if powderized reddish-yellow. When moistened it assumes a brown to black shade. After rain, the water descends toward the valley, carrying with it the sand in the form of silt. This, through evaporation, is transformed into a plastic black dough, slides like a glacier slowly down the hillsides, and finally comes to rest in some broad hollow which it gradually fills. Such a silt aggregation is called in Persia a ¡°Kevir.¡± Its surface dries, but the interior remains moist. As evaporation continues it becomes richer in salt so that white crusts of this substance are formed during dry periods. In other districts, as in the basin of the Tarim River, the water occasionally appears in the lowest parts, the so-called ¡°Bayirs¡± (see Fig. 9), formations similar to the Kevirs, or in salt lakes between the sand dunes. Sand carried by the winds quickly fills these lakes so that they too move in the direction of prevailing winds. They lie with their longest dimensions parallel to each other and at right angle to the course of the Tarim River. The sketch map taken from Hedin¡¯s work shows the Bayirs strung out in line with the lakes somewhat like panels in a tapestry pattern. This reticulation of the landscape is the result of the dune formations. The main dunes with steep western slopes run in 
the direction N.N.E.-S.S.W. They stand at right angle to the prevailing winds. Nearly perpendicular to their crest lines dunes of smaller height are thrown up by winds in another common direction but less frequent than those which raised the fundamental dunes. This system brings to mind the cloud formations called mackerel sky, clouds rippled in two directions frequently almost at right angle to each other. They owe their peculiarity to two series of wave motions propelled by winds from two different directions in the upper strata of the atmosphere. The cloud patches correspond to the wavecrests on a surging sea. The map of the Bayirs suggests a chessboard with squares somewhat elongated and irregular.
with a dry surface, measures 500 km. (310 miles) in length and 200 km. (124 miles) in width over its largest dimensions. Hedin estimates its area at 55,000 sq. km. (21,142 sq. miles) or the same as that of the great Lake Michigan on the boundary between the United States and Canada. Due to the continuous growth of the salt proportion through the inflow of Kevirs and through superficial evaporation a salt crust of varying thickness is formed near the surface of the lake. Hedin caused a hole to be cut with an iron bar. He first encountered a 10 cm. (3.9 in.) deep covering of clayey paste, and then the salt crust about 7 cm. (2.8 in.) thick resting on a semi-dry layer of clay with a depth of 15 cm. (5.9 in.). Farther below, softer strata of clay followed, becoming more watery the deeper he went. The iron bar carelessly wielded would have disappeared in the mire. Another investigator, Buhse, examined a piece of the crust, which when dry is fairly solid and of a yellowish-grey colour. One half consisted of sand (probably quartz-sand), one sixth of limestone, 6.1 per cent. oxide of iron (causing the yellow colour), 5.3 per cent. common salt, 2.5 per cent. sulphate of sodium, and 2.1 per cent. clay. Rain converts this surface layer into a plastic mass, which persistently sticks to the clothes of the traveller or to the bodies of the camels if they should slip and fall into the mud. Not the slightest trace of vegetation or of any life exists. On the shore of the mud-lake small flat elevations and depressions may be found; otherwise, the surface is as level as that of an ordinary lake.
The Kevir battles with the drifting sand as does the water in East Turkestan. The sand appears to gain in the contest. After storms, vast portions of the Kevir are covered with yellow desert sand. ¡°If the climatic change in Persia continues in the present direction,¡± says Hedin, who, 
however, is dealing with large spans of time inasmuch as in his opinion no appreciable alterations have taken place since the invasions of Alexander the Great, ¡°then it may be taken for granted that the slough of the Kevir will lose in moisture and afflux of water and in time will become more solid and that the drift sand with greater ease will gain foothold and territory. The final outcome of the physico-geographical transformation now in progress will no doubt be to convert the entire Kevir into a sand desert of the kind predominating in East Turkestan. And conversely we may infer that East Turkestan, once a part of the central Asiatic Mediterranean sea, in the course of time was filled with the finely divided products of disintegration, such as we now find in the Kevir, and further that its expanse of watery mud and clay finally dried and hardened to such an extent that it could support the load of the encroaching sand. That the extension of the sand formerly was smaller, is also borne out by the arch?ological discoveries in East Turkestan which several travellers besides myself have made. The hardpan laid bare in the ¡®Bayirs¡¯ of the Cherchen desert strongly reminds of the Kevir-ground. In both cases the same dark, fine powder forming a nearly plane surface. In both cases this material when mixed with water is transformed into a slough in which one hopelessly sinks, but in East Turkestan the water has receded to a greater depth and as rains are extremely rare travel all over the smooth ¡®Bayir¡¯-ground may be undertaken with impunity.¡±
These formations are of the greatest interest because they picture the changes taking place on a slowly desiccating planet. In 1858 the Geographical Society in Petrograd despatched an expedition under the command of Khanikoff to visit these regions. From Hedin¡¯s work, Overland to India, from which the preceding quotation is taken, we borrow the 
following vivid description by Khanikoff: ¡°At last, in the morning of April fourth, and during the most oppressive heat, we reached Bala-haus. At this place remnants of a ruined reservoir, long since bereft of its water, could be seen. The desert had here assumed the perfect character of the ¡®the accursed land,¡¯ which name it bears among the natives. Not the smallest tuft of grass, not a sign of animal life gladdened the eye, not a sound interrupted the deathlike, awful silence but that of the marching caravan.
¡°Because of the slow procession of the camels and the delay suffered when we lost our way, we only covered 25 km. (15.5 miles) in the night stage. After four hours¡¯ rest we resumed our march and directed our steps toward the hills, called Kellehper and situated 20 km. (12.5 miles) from Bala-haus; they were plainly visible but positively seemed to take flight on our approach. I was somewhat ahead of the caravan and sat down at the foot of this sand-elevation; and never can I describe the feeling of weariness and of depression that I was unable to ward off as I looked into the ghastly solitude that engulfed me. Scattered clouds intercepted the rays of the sun, but the air was hot and heavy; the diffused light lent a monotonous and disconsolating hue to the greyish, burning surface of the desert; hardly a single variation of colour gave relief to the immense expanses that the vision embraced. The absolute immobility of every point in this mournful landscape, combined with the complete absence of any sound, produced an overwhelming depression of the spirit; one felt as set upon a place that had been struck inanimate for ever, a place to which organic life would never return safe through some terrible catastrophe of nature. One witnessed the beginning, so to speak, of the death-agony of our planet.¡±
If a drying out has taken place in these regions,¡ªwhich seems probable from Hedin¡¯s observation that the water in a Tibet lake, Lakker-tso, formerly reached a 133 m. (435 ft.) higher level than at present,¡ªsuch a process is nevertheless not so obvious here as in the salt inland lakes, for instance the Great Salt Lake in Utah, the Dead Sea, and the Caspian Sea, where the saltness has greatly increased due to evaporation. Concerning the Great Salt Lake we know that even at a comparatively late time it had a much wider extension than now. Its water contains 22 per cent. common salt besides other compounds. The Dead Sea holds 25 per cent. salt. A very variable percentage is to be found in the Caspian Sea. Near the mouth of the Volga it is of course low, only 0.15, and increases southward to 1.32 at the peninsula Apsheron and to 5.63 in the bay of Kaidak. In the gulf of Karaboghaz on the Asiatic side it reaches 28.5 per cent. It has been computed that this gulf receives annually from the inrushing waters of the Caspian Sea 350,000 tons of salt which is partly deposited on its shores and bottom.
This desiccation, however, is a mere trifle when contrasted with the process by which the mighty salt deposits in Germany were formed. It took place, we believe, in a shallow bay extending southward from the Arctic Sea. As the salts, first gypsum, then common salt, and lastly more soluble potassium and magnesium compounds, crystallized by degrees new water masses entered from the sea. At the same time, the bottom of the gulf slowly receded, giving room for fresh evaporating floods. The salt layers deposited in this manner sometimes reach a depth of more than 1000 m. (about one half a mile). We can thus gain a conception of the immense quantities of water evaporated and the enormous time required therefor. The deposits would long 
ago have been carried away from their original place were it not for the fact that they finally were covered with a layer of slime nearly impervious to water. The most soluble salts, such as chloride of magnesium, have nevertheless been extracted to a great extent.
The extremes of aridity or humidity have of course not occurred during the brief time known to history. Of a special interest is the question in what direction the climate at present is tending. In this connection, Huntington has aroused great attention by propounding the theory that the earth is now in a period of rapid desiccation.
Judging by the testimony of geology, it seems beyond doubt that an age of humidity prevailed simultaneously with the ice-period in northern Europe, over several parts of the globe, in fact everywhere as far as we know except in Australia. This is clearly borne out by the higher levels of the lakes and their consequent greater extension in earlier days. So far as Tibet and Central Asia are concerned we have already mentioned this fact. But in America and Africa the humid period was even more patent. The Great Salt Lake has covered an area many times greater than at present as testify the picturesque terraces in its surroundings (compare Fig. 10). According to the researches by Passage, this period was also strongly pronounced in Africa. A large fresh-water body occupied the Congo basin, the Tsad lake had a far greater expansion than now, and mighty rivers traversed Sahara.
Fig. 10. Extension of the great Lake Bonneville in Utah, of which the Great Salt Lake is a remnant.
It is often assumed that the climate of Africa has been more humid even in historic times. The geographer Leo Berg
in Petrograd, however, is emphatically opposed to this theory. He points out that the writers of antiquity, Diodoros, Polybios, and Pausanias, have given descriptions of the rivers on the North African coast which nearly agree with conditions today. The location of two ancient cities on the shores of Lake Chott-el-Djerid in Tunis (Lacus Tritonis of old), which lake, it is claimed, reached a level very much higher than now 500 years B.C., plainly demonstrates that the shore-line then ran very close to its present position. Students of ancient Egypt are unable to find evidence of any distinct difference in the climate of that country from the earliest times to our days. It is true that marshes in the Nile delta have changed into splendid meadows¡ªbut this is the work of man. The humid period must have ended long before history commenced. A few of the old writers, such as Herodotos, Aristophanes, and Philo, assert that rain never falls in Egypt, but this must be classed as an exaggeration when contrasted with references to rain, snow, and hail in this section made by other ancient authors, for instance Plutarch, Pliny, and ?lianus. At any rate it seems as if precipitation was as rare an occurrence in the land of the Pharaohs as in the land of the Nile of today.
Against the statement by Huntington that the climate of Palestine has become very much more torrid during historic times, stands the assertion by Hilderscheid, who has made a thorough study of these questions, that no reason whatever exists for such a conclusion.
Of greatest interest to us in this connection are perhaps Italy and Greece. Huntington believes that the river Alpheios, which flooded Olympia and covered it with a 4 m. to 5 m. (4 or 5 yards) thick sediment, carried a far greater volume of water formerly than today. This flood, however, was caused 
by an earthquake accompanied by a fall of rocks whereby the river was dammed. There is no necessity for assuming a greater abundance of the waterflow. According to Strabo, the streams Kefissos and Ilissos, between which Athens is situated, dried out during the summer then as they do now. If we are to believe Pausanias, the brooks which traversed the Argive plain behaved similarly, and so they behave today. From all we can judge, the climate of Greece has not changed perceptibly since the days of Homer.
In regard to Sicily, it is stated that several of its rivers were navigable in the Middle Age, while such is not the case now. But this is explained by the devastation of the forests which formerly equalized the flow of these rivers, and perhaps also by the size of the vessels of that time. Cultivation in these regions has sharply declined since antiquity. As a consequence, the loose soil, which formerly was planted, has been washed away and the dams and retaining walls, built to prevent a too rapid drain of the water, have disappeared. Thus the country has grown increasingly arid. Large cities, as Palmyra, existed in desert regions where lack of water now prevents habitation. But water was brought to the metropolitan cities of old through long magnificent aqueducts, the ruins of which partly remain today. We have all reasons to believe that the marked decrease in cultivation and population, laid to changes in conditions of humidity, depended altogether on man¡¯s interference with nature. On certain rocks in Morocco, carvings have been found portraying in a simple way large mammals such as elephants, rhinoceroses, and giraffes, which do not exist in these regions now because of lack of nourishment. But these rough works of art, resembling those of the bushmen of today, date from prehistoric time, the so-called paleolithic era, when the climate admittedly was more humid in these regions than it is now.
Similar conditions obtain, according to Hedin, in Central Asia and in Persia. The climate there has without doubt been more humid but not in historic times. The march of Alexander toward India took place under as adverse conditions as now are found in these regions (Baluchistan). Their cities, now in ruins, received their water supply through conduits from rivers some of which were then adjacent to the cities, although they later have changed their course as pointed out by Leo Berg.
In Western and Central Europe numerous marshes and morasses have indeed been drained and rendered available for cultivation, but this does not prove that the climate is become more dry. On the contrary all observations, for 
climate admittedly was more humid in these regions than it is now.
Similar conditions obtain, according to Hedin, in Central Asia and in Persia. The climate there has without doubt been more humid but not in historic times. The march of Alexander toward India took place under as adverse conditions as now are found in these regions (Baluchistan). Their cities, now in ruins, received their water supply through conduits from rivers some of which were then adjacent to the cities, although they later have changed their course as pointed out by Leo Berg.
In Western and Central Europe numerous marshes and morasses have indeed been drained and rendered available for cultivation, but this does not prove that the climate is become more dry. On the contrary all observations, for instance those made by Tycho Brahe on the island Hven, indicate that the difference between summer and winter temperature has decreased during historic time; that is the climate is become less continental, or more humid, than formerly. Furthermore, many circumstances, such as the occurrence of hazel and of water chestnut in far more northerly latitudes and the higher altitude of the timber line in earlier time, prove that the summer in prehistoric ages was warmer than now. Simultaneously it was dryer. A study of the lacustrine pile dwellings in Switzerland shows that the levels of the lakes then were not higher than now but very nearly the same, which demonstrates that the precipitation has not changed perceptibly in Switzerland since these buildings were made; the period in question occurred, we believe, about 7000 years ago.
While great climatic changes have taken place since man¡¯s first appearance on earth, presumably before the end 
of the ice period, historic time is too short to record any distinct modifications. Local ones may be in evidence such as West Europe¡¯s transition to a less continental climate. A variation of this nature has been found not longer back than since thermometrical observations commenced. Thus the winters in Berlin during the period 1746¨C1847 were colder and the summers warmer than during 1848¨C1907. The difference for January amounted to -1.5¡ã C. (-2.7¡ã F.) and for May to +0.6¡ã C. (+1.08¡ã F.). The tabulation below, quoted from Ekholm, shows the mean temperature in Stockholm, Lund, London, and Paris, during winter (December-February), spring (March-May), summer (June-August), and autumn (September-November) and for the following periods:
The difference is not great. For Stockholm the winter has grown warmer, the autumn colder, for London the winter warmer and so slightly also the summer, but spring and autumn a trifle colder, and for Paris the summer a little warmer while the autumn is considerably colder. Lund shows the least variation. The winter has grown 0.4¡ã C. (0.72¡ã F.) warmer and the summer colder by the same amount. The annual mean remains nearly constant, only slightly increased, but the climate is become more marine. (This is hardly apparent from the figures cited as far as Paris is concerned.)
From Tycho Brahe¡¯s observations of the number of days when snow or rain fell in the place where his observatory was situated on the island Hven in ?resund not far from Copenhagen, Ekholm has calculated that the temperature there during the time 1582¨C1597 was 1.4¡ã C. (2.5¡ã F.) lower in February and 1¡ã C. (1.8¡ã F.) lower in March than in later 
years (1881¨C1896). On the other hand the first autumn frost occurred at the same time as now and the same was the case with the last frost in spring, so that the temperatures on these dates in autumn and spring were nearly identical at the end of the sixteenth century and now. Ekholm drew the conclusion that the climate is become more marine.
Hildebrandson makes the objection that Tycho Brahe¡¯s observations were confined to an abnormally cold period judging by the tables Speerschneider has prepared showing the ice formation in Danish navigable waters. Nine out of the sixteen years in which Tycho Brahe gathered his data were notable for abnormally cold winters, while only nineteen out of the hundred years composing the sixteenth century were characterized by equally severe winters.
Thus, the conclusion is not warranted that the winters of the sixteenth century as a whole averaged colder than those of the nineteenth. Later investigations (in 1917) in regard to the dates when the ice would break up in Lake M?lar at Vester?s, in Neva River at Petrograd, and in Dwina River at Riga, have led Ekholm to believe that he has found a periodicity in winter temperatures of not less than 212 years, a conclusion which would agree with Speerschneider¡¯s statistics. If so, we are at present living in a period remarkable for its mild winters while a series of extremely severe winter seasons occurred at the time of Tycho Brahe. This law would also have a bearing on the preceding table of temperatures in Stockholm, Lund, London, and Paris as a succession of severe winters came around in the beginning of the nineteenth century while the reverse is true towards its end. On the whole climatic variations during historic time have been insignificant, if present at all, provided we extend 
our comparisons over two or more centuries. Such is also the opinion of Hildebrandson.
The idea of a slow deterioration of the climate due to increasing desiccation is of old lineage and is most likely related to the venerable conception of a bygone golden age. Aristotle even at that early date believed that a gradual arefaction of the Earth took place. In recent times this faith has been particularly fostered by Huntington in a number of treatises where he endeavours to prove that Asia, represented for instance by Palestine, Syria, and Persia, and further Africa and North America are subject to a rapid exsiccation clearly traceable through historic time. The contrary, however, is true about Western Europe. It was often said that Southern Russia in recent times suffered a slow arefaction manifesting itself in the formation of steppes. This led to careful investigations showing the assertion to be erroneous 
n a certain sense, we are justified in speaking of an atmosphere of suns and stars. These bodies consist mainly of a comparatively dense mass surrounded by a layer of very attenuated gas. The density of our Sun is about 1.4 times that of water. In other stars it is considerably lower, in some cases only a few hundredths of the density of water. This applies particularly to those stars of variable magnitude, the Cepheid type, named after their longest and best known representative, the mysterious star Delta in the constellation Cepheus, and in general to young stars. In any case the stars 
These extensive gas appendages may be considered as a kind of atmosphere surrounding the stars in question. Their density is no doubt exceedingly small. Our own central orb, the Sun, is also endowed with rarefied gases outside of the luminous clouds. By their absorption of light they cause the dark lines in the Sun¡¯s spectrum, after their discoverer named Fraunhofer lines. The greatest height from the surface of the Sun is reached by hydrogen, mixed with a small quantity of helium and with a gas, unknown on Earth, which we call coronium because it has been observed in the Sun¡¯s corona. These gases may be looked upon as the atmosphere of the Sun.
Similar conditions obtain no doubt on the major planets, which possess a density not essentially different from that of the Sun. They have, moreover, practically the same period of revolution around their own axis, Jupiter 9.9 hours, Saturn 10.3, and Uranus (probably) 10.8 hours. Judging by their density, they are, in all probability, like the Sun, gaseous throughout except for the heavy cloud formations which appear to constitute the outer limit of these stellar bodies. Their interior, like that of the Sun, may contain comparatively sluggish gas-masses, as certain peculiar patches appear on their exterior, similar to the sunspots and persisting for long intervals, sometimes over a year. The best known example of the kind is the so-called red spot on Jupiter, which has remained since 1878, although it is not so pronounced now as during its early days (see Fig. 11). Characteristic for these planets are certain bands of a marked delineation and running parallel with the equator (see Figs. 11 and 12). They are caused by the rapid peripheral motion of these planets, with Jupiter 28 and with Saturn 24 times that of the Earth.
Fig. 11. The planet Jupiter in 1909 in Mercator¡¯s projection by F. le Coultre of Geneva. The ¡°red spot¡± over which the clouds are dispersed, is found at 355¡ã Long. and 20¡ã S. Lat. in the outcurving of the dark band. South direction is upward, as on all pictures obtained with astronomical tubes.
Which gases should we expect to find in the atmosphere of these planets? According to the Kant-Laplace hypothesis, a theory generally credited with a sound kernel, the planets were segregated from the Sun¡¯s substance at a time when the latter was expanded so as to include the orbits of these planets and beyond. Naturally, therefore, their atmospheres would originally be composed of the very gases that formed the outmost part of the Sun¡¯s atmosphere, notably hydrogen. 
Fig. 11. The planet Jupiter in 1909 in Mercator¡¯s projection by F. le Coultre of Geneva. The ¡°red spot¡± over which the clouds are dispersed, is found at 355¡ã Long. and 20¡ã S. Lat. in the outcurving of the dark band. South direction is upward, as on all pictures obtained with astronomical tubes.
Which gases should we expect to find in the atmosphere of these planets? According to the Kant-Laplace hypothesis, a theory generally credited with a sound kernel, the planets were segregated from the Sun¡¯s substance at a time when the latter was expanded so as to include the orbits of these planets and beyond. Naturally, therefore, their atmospheres would originally be composed of the very gases that formed the outmost part of the Sun¡¯s atmosphere, notably hydrogen. Slipher, who has photographed the spectra here reproduced of the outer planets, believes that certain strong absorption bands in the spectra of Neptune and Uranus correspond to the distinctive F and C lines of hydrogen, using Fraunhofer¡¯s denotation (see Fig. 13). But because the bands in question, as shown on the figure, are very broad it is difficult to identify them with certainty. Also other gases of unknown origin enter into the vapour envelopes outside of the clouds and cause, as apparent from their spectra, a strong absorption of the sunlight reflected from the clouds below. The absorption increases with the planet¡¯s distance from the Sun; thus, it is most pronounced on Neptune and least on Jupiter.
Fig. 12. The appearance of Saturn September 30, 1909, according to F. le Coultre of Geneva.
Moon¡¯s mean density (3.3) is only six-tenths of the Earth¡¯s (which again is 5.53 times that of water), and we might therefore have expected that the Moon in parting should have shared in the very lightest constituents of the Earth, namely its air-covering. Such was unquestionably the actual procedure, but in the course of time the Moon has lost its originally no doubt considerable atmosphere. The reason is that the molecules in a gas are in a continuous rapid motion, which is the swifter the lighter the gas and the higher its temperature. In hydrogen, the lightest gas known, the velocity amounts to 1.84 km. (1.15 miles) per second at 0¡ã C. (32¡ã F.). The parts of the Moon exposed to the strongest sunlight are heated to about 150¡ã C. (300¡ã F.). At that temperature, the average velocity of hydrogen molecules is 2.29 km. (1.43 miles) per second. But a body departing from the surface of the Moon at a rate of 2 km. (1.24 miles) per second, or more, cannot be retained by the attraction of that globe and therefore never retraces its path but speeds away for ever. In the same manner a bullet ejected from a cannon with an initial velocity of 11.2 km. (7 miles)¡ªa velocity not even approached by present artillery¡ªwould fly away from Earth barring the resistance of the air. Thus we see that we as yet are far from the realization of the dreams of Jules Verne in his A Voyage to the Moon. At any rate, gravity on the Moon is too weak to retain hydrogen over the hottest point of the surface. This part of the gas flies away, new supplies rush in from the sides, and in a short time all traces of hydrogen have disappeared from the Moon. Probably it was mainly gathered in by the Sun, where a velocity of 613 km. (380 miles) per second is necessary if the molecules are to overcome the Sun¡¯s attraction, while their actual velocity there amounts to only about 8 km. (5 miles) per second.
In a similar manner we find that the second lightest gas, helium, at a temperature of 150¡ã C. (300¡ã F.), possesses a molecular velocity of 1.62 km. (1.1 miles) per second. This is less than the 2 km. (1.24 miles) per second necessary to leave the Moon¡¯s sphere of attraction. But all helium molecules do not move at the same speed; some are faster and some slower than the average. Those moving at a higher rate than 2 km. (1.24 miles) per second constitute a considerable fraction of the total. This fraction disappears. Equilibrium is soon restored so that in less than a second the same fraction of helium molecules is ready to depart. In this manner the Moon lost its helium atmosphere speedily, although not quite as rapidly as its hydrogen.
More slowly yet vanished the gases which are most abundant in our atmosphere, nitrogen and oxygen, but these too were not fettered for ever by the limited gravity on the Moon. The same fate befell aqueous vapour, which is nearly twice as light as oxygen. The loss of water, however, was long delayed, as we later shall learn, because new vapour masses were discharged from the lunar volcanoes. In these considerations, we should also bear in mind that the Moon no doubt was a fluid molten mass when separating from the Earth and its substance resembled the lava from our volcanoes. In this condition it remained until its exterior temperature had fallen to about 1200¡ã C. (2200¡ã F.). At that point, the average velocity of oxygen molecules is about 1 km. (.62 mile) per second, with variations in both directions, so that a few per cent. of them reach a sufficient velocity to leave the Moon for ever. Such gas molecules of medium weight return probably to the Earth which, as experience tells us, is ponderous enough to hold them in bonds.
All gases, that constitute any considerable fraction of the Earth¡¯s atmosphere, and which, therefore, most likely were divided with the Moon in its parting from us, have again left that globe. The same unquestionably holds true for other stellar bodies of equal or smaller size, such as all the minor planets and for the great majority of the satellites to the major ones. Only the very largest of Jupiter¡¯s moons, and possibly Neptune¡¯s lonely companion, whose size is not known with certainty, might possibly surpass our Moon in ability to retain gases. Our reasoning with respect to the Moon applies also to Mercury. It is true that the molecules there must possess a velocity one and a half times as high as on the Moon if they are to leave the planet. But at the same time the temperature on Mercury¡¯s hottest point, always turned toward the Sun, is far higher, about 400¡ã C. (750¡ã F.), so that the molecules there move 1.26 times as fast as similar molecules over the Moon¡¯s hottest point. Mercury is consequently better able than the Moon to retain gases, but the difference is slight. Direct observations (see below) also lead us to believe that Mercury is very similar to the Moon in these respects. We might possibly imagine that certain gases, which on the Moon would condense into fluids or solids, on Mercury might remain volatilized on account of the high temperature and thus form an atmosphere. Such assumption, however, would be erroneous. The investigations by Schiaparelli and by all his successors show that Mercury in turning around its axis always presents the selfsame side to the Sun. The opposite side, never reached by a ray of sunlight, must assume an extremely low temperature, very close to the absolute zero (-273.7¡ã C. or -460.6¡ã F.) and far below any cold existing on the Moon. To this side, all bodies with an appreciable vapour pressure must distil and freeze to 
solid lumps or frost-coverings without perceptible vapour pressure. For these reasons, Mercury cannot possess any atmosphere to speak of. There remain in the whole series of planets and satellites in our solar system only two bodies besides the Earth which are endowed with an atmosphere in the original sense of the word¡ªnamely, Mars and Venus.
We reach the same conclusion when investigating the ability of the planets to reflect the sunlight falling upon them. The bodies which possess an atmosphere hold also suspended therein clouds of water or ice, and also of dust, whirled up from below. These floating particles reflect light far more efficiently than the solid or fluid surface of a planet. The Moon can now reflect 7.3 per cent. of the sunlight and Mercury 6.9 per cent. (H. N. Russell, Proceedings Nat. Acad., 1916). These numbers lie so close that they may be considered practically the same within errors of observation.
It is therefore probable that Mercury is as devoid of an atmosphere as the Moon. The opposite extreme is represented by Venus, which reflects not less than 59 per cent. of the sunlight received, according to H. N. Russell. Terrestrial clouds were found by Abbot to return 65 per cent. We believe from astronomical observations that the entire surface of Venus is hidden behind a thick opaque cloud-covering. The slight difference between O.65 and O.59 may be due to errors of observation, but also to a small absorption of light in those parts of Venus¡¯s atmosphere which are outside of the clouds. Saturn and Jupiter are very similar to Venus in this regard with 63 and 56 per cent. respectively. The gases above the clouds on these planets extinguish to a considerable extent the sunlight reflected from the clouds, as apparent from their spectra. (Compare Fig. 13.) Hence the value 0.63 given by Russell for Saturn is probably too high. 
Concerning Jupiter it has been observed that its red light becomes deeper when the sunspots are few, but whiter when the spots are numerous. The sunspots have been found to favour the formation of high clouds, such as cirrus, and this would seem to apply also to Jupiter; when spots are plenty, the clouds are high, and consequently the absorbing layers above, which cause the red colour, are thinner, so that Jupiter will then shine with a whiter¡ªless red¡ªlustre than when the sunspots are rare.
The two outmost planets, Uranus and Neptune, return, according to Russell, 63 and 73 per cent. respectively of the sunlight received. These figures are probably too high. They do not agree well with Slipher¡¯s records of their spectra (Fig. 12).
There now remains Mars. This planet approaches the Moon inasmuch as it reflects only 15.4 per cent. of the sunlight arriving to the orb. Everything points to the conclusion that the atmosphere of Mars is very thin. Lowell estimates, on somewhat meagre grounds, however, that on each square metre of the planet rests only 22 per cent. of the mass of air supported by each square metre of the Earth¡¯s surface.
It would naturally be very interesting to ascertain the amount of sunlight our Earth throws back into space. This we cannot measure, as we cannot place our instruments outside of the Earth¡¯s cloud-mists nor can we read them there. Not less than 52 per cent. of the Earth is covered with clouds, whose whiteness (Latin: Albedo) is 65. Thus the clouds alone return 0.52 ¡Á 0.65 = 0.338 parts of the sunlight. Of this portion a fraction amounting to about 4 per cent. is extinguished in the air above. The remainder is 0.325. Atmosphere and suspended dust reduce the sunlight over the 
cloud-free part, i. e. 48 per cent. of the Earth, by 60 per cent, half of which returns to space, while the other half reaches the ground in the form of light from the sky, and of this fraction again about 4 per cent. is reflected into space; these two items added give 0.15. Finally, the 40 per cent. sunlight directly received by the Earth¡¯s surface is reflected to the extent of 6 per cent. by the oceans and by the generally moist ground; deserts and bare rocks reflect about twice as much, but their total area is comparatively small; of this 6 per cent. reflected light, 70 per cent. reaches outside space; thus we obtain 0.48 ¡Á 0.40 ¡Á 0.06 ¡Á 0.70 = 0.008. In all, therefore, the amount of reflected sunlight is 0.338 + 0.15 + 0.008 = 49.6 per cent. If the air were free from clouds, the reflexion-number or Albedo would be 33 per cent., or considerably higher than that of Mars. When now half or a little more (52%) of the Earth¡¯s surface is overcast with clouds and this portion therefore has the whiteness of Venus, the figure 49.6 (Russell calculates the figure 45) for the entire Earth naturally falls closer¡ªalmost 3.6 times¡ªto 59, the figure of Venus, than to 15.4, the figure for Mars. We may also compare the value 33 per cent., which applies to the cloud-free portion of the Earth, with the value 15.4 per cent. for Mars, which is almost without clouds, and with the value 7.3 per cent. for the Moon, which has neither clouds nor dust, because it lacks an atmosphere. We can then conclude that the atmosphere of our Earth holds almost three times as much dust suspended over each square metre as does Mars, and this in spite of the smaller gravitational force on Mars, which is about 37.5 per cent. of that on Earth. Taking proper account of the low temperature on Mars we may easily compute, by means of a formula given by Stokes, that a particle of dust should sink 2.3 times slower on Mars than on 
Earth. When, nevertheless and in spite of frequent but thin mists, so few particles of dust float in the atmosphere of Mars, the conception inevitably comes to our mind that the air on that planet must be extremely rarefied so that the wind-puffs have little power to raise the dust from the ground. Lowell estimated the barometric pressure at the surface of Mars to be about 64 mm. (2.52 inches), and Proctor gives about twice this figure. There appears to be ground for considering already the former value too high; both are very uncertain. If we accept that of Lowell, we find that each square metre of the surface of Mars supports a column of air, whose mass is only about one-fifth of the mass resting on each square metre of ocean surface on Earth.
Fig. 14. The planet Venus, with sunlit atmosphere (to the left), as observed by Langley at the Venus passage December 6, 1882.
The dense clouds which float above Venus have long ago led to the assumption that the atmosphere of that planet must be far deeper than that of the Earth. Its strong refractory power has also contributed to this belief. When Venus is close to the sun-disc the dark body stands forth surrounded by a ring of light (see Fig. 14). It is, however, recognized that this phenomenon requires no greater air density than that on Earth for its appearance. In this connection we should remember that the inside limit of the vapour shell which we in this manner observe, is the cloud-wall, not the ground. And these clouds, we have every reason to believe, float on 
account of the heat prevailing at a great height in the atmosphere, so high in fact that they form an impenetrable wall already where the cirrus clouds appear in our sky. If these suppositions are correct, the light-ring mentioned is caused by a quarter only of the air-masses on Venus, and its total air-covering must be far deeper than that of the Earth. The latter occupies probably in this respect as well as in reference to position in space a middle ground between Mars with its extremely thin and Venus with its comparatively dense atmosphere. If so, we might expect the atmosphere on Mercury to be denser yet, while we already have seen that it is almost wholly lacking on that planet. The explanation is that Mercury has lost its spin around its own axis and therefore always presents the same side to the Sun¡ªjust as the Moon and probably all other satellites turn one side only toward their respective central bodies¡ªhence the opposite side becomes so cold that all gases are there condensed to fluids or solids except the two most volatile ones, hydrogen and helium, which on the other hand leave the planet on its hot side. If Venus, therefore, as held by several astronomers from Schiaparelli to Lowell, always turned one side only toward the Sun, this planet also would be without any perceptible air-covering. According to investigations by Bjelopolsky of Venus¡¯s spectrum, which investigations, however, are in complete disagreement with corresponding measurements by Slipher, that planet has a period of rotation on its own axis of about 29 hours. This figure is very uncertain and a new determination is therefore highly desirable.
In order to understand the atmospheres of the planets, it is of great interest to ascertain the composition of the air that surrounds the Earth. Our knowledge in these matters has 
grown considerably of late. We shall in the main follow the presentation by Dr. Wegener of Marburg.
We know at present with considerable accuracy which gases enter into the air. Besides the previously well-known nitrogen and oxygen which contribute the bulk, 78.1 and 20.9 per cent. respectively, of the total volume at the earth¡¯s surface, we find water vapour in proportions changing with localities and times, and it is for this reason left out when fixing the various percentages; further, carbon dioxide 0.03 volume per cent. and the rare gases discovered by Rayleigh and Ramsay, argon, 0.932 per cent., neon 0.0012 per cent., helium 0.0004 per cent., krypton 0.000005 per cent., and xenon 0.0000006 per cent. Each one of these constituents diminishes in quantity with height in accordance with the so-called barometer-formula and the rate is the more rapid the heavier the gas. Krypton and xenon, therefore, which are two and one half and four times heavier than oxygen, occur mainly in the lower strata. The percentage of helium on the other hand, a gas eight times lighter than oxygen, should increase rapidly with height. If the air consisted of a mixture of oxygen and helium at 0¡ã C. (32¡ã F.) the former would decrease to one half at an elevation of 5 km. (3.1 miles) but the latter not before we had ascended 40 km. (25 miles) (eight times higher than for oxygen, as the weights are in the ratio of 1 to 8). At that altitude, oxygen would have decreased in the proportion 1:28 = 1:256. When, as actually is the case, there is 50,000 times more oxygen than helium at the surface this ratio should decrease in the proportion 128:1 at a height of 40 km. (25 miles). Ninety kilometers (56 miles) above the surface helium should overbalance oxygen and thereafter rapidly gain in preponderance. This holds true 
provided no agitation takes place in the form of vertical currents of air.
Similar laws apply to all light gases which do not turn into fluids or solids at low temperatures. Aqueous vapour, on the other hand, which when cooled condenses to clouds, diminishes much faster than the nearly twice as heavy oxygen, because the temperature rapidly decreases as we move upward or at a rate of about 5¡ã C. per km. (14.5¡ã F. per mile) up to 2.5 km. (1.5 miles) and of 8¡ã C. per km. (23¡ã F. per mile) at a height of 8.5 km. (5.3 miles). The quantity of water vapour shrinks to one half at 1.9 km. (slightly more than a mile) above ground. Carbon dioxide again follows the barometer-formula applicable to other gases because it occurs in such minute quantity that it never condenses to clouds. In fact, it is water vapour alone which must be treated as an exception. Carbon dioxide is nearly one and one half times heavier than the other gases of the atmosphere on an average. It should therefore diminish in the proportion 1:21.5 = 1:2.8 in a vertical distance of 5 km. (3.1 miles) while the density of the air decreases only in the ratio 1:2. Several determinations of the presence of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere as high up as 3.8 km. (2.33 miles) have been made, by S. A. Andree among others, but the percentage of this gas remains constant within the errors of observation. The same holds true to a height of 7 km. (4.35 miles) for the proportion between oxygen and nitrogen, although we might have expected a perceptible change as oxygen is 14 per cent. heavier than nitrogen. How shall we explain this fact which seemingly contradicts the theory just advanced?
The explanation is quite simple. The preceding statements hold true for a mass of air at perfect rest. But, if the air is violently agitated, the composition becomes 
homogeneous all through. We know that in the barometric cyclones and anticyclones strong rising and descending air currents flow. The composition of the atmosphere, therefore, becomes the same as far up as this mixing action prevails. These currents produce another effect, namely, a fall of temperature with rising height. Because when a gas is transported upward the surrounding pressure decreases, resulting in expansion and consequent cooling. It is well known that a gas is heated when (rapidly) compressed, a quality formerly made use of in the pneumatic fire-tool to ignite tinder. It is evident that conversely a gas must cool off when expanding. If now the mixing of the air were extremely rapid the thermometer would fall very close to 10¡ã C. (18¡ã F.) with each km. (.62 miles) rise in elevation. If, on the other hand, the air stood perfectly still in a vertical direction, the temperature would remain constant at all heights over the same point. Between these two extremes, we find the actual condition, inasmuch as the temperature of the atmosphere decreases upward 5¡ã to 8¡ã C. per km. (14.5¡ã to 23¡ã F. per mile) as observed during balloon ascensions.
This applies to the so-called ¡°troposphere¡±¡ªmixing-zone. One of the most remarkable discoveries in recent times, made by Teisserenc de Bort and Assman, is the fact that the decrease of temperature with height does not continue indefinitely but only up to a certain elevation,¡ªin middle Europe about 11 km. (7 miles), in Lapland about 7 km. (4.5 miles), and at the equator about 15 km. (10.5 miles)¡ªand above this point the temperature remains constant. We now meet the peculiar condition that the temperature of this upper layer, which is called stratosphere¡ª¡°film-zone¡±¡ªis lowest over the equator, because it commences at a great height there, and lowest over the polar regions, where it extends 

